A man is an adult male human. Prior to adulthood, a male human is referred to as a boy. Like most other male mammals, a man's genome typically inherits an X chromosome from his mother and a Y chromosome from his father. The male fetus generally produces larger amounts of androgens and smaller amounts of estrogens than a female fetus. This difference in the relative amounts of these sex steroids is largely responsible for the physiological differences that distinguish men from women. During puberty, hormones which stimulate androgen production result in the development of secondary sexual characteristics, thus exhibiting greater differences between the sexes. However, there are exceptions to the above for some transgender and intersex men.A woman is an adult female human. The term woman may also refer to a girl (a female child or adolescent). The plural women is sometimes used for female humans regardless of age, as in phrases such as "women's rights." Typically, a woman has two X chromosomes and is capable of pregnancy and giving birth from puberty until menopause. Female anatomy, as distinguished from male anatomy, includes the fallopian tubes, ovaries, uterus, vulva, breasts, Skene's glands, and Bartholin's glands. The adult female pelvis is wider than the male's, the hips are generally broader, and women have significantly less facial and other body hair. On average, women are shorter and less muscular than men. Throughout human history, traditional gender roles have often defined and limited women's activities and opportunities; many religious doctrines stipulate certain rules for women. With restrictions loosening during the 20th century in many societies, women have gained access to careers beyond the traditional homemaker, and the ability to pursue higher education. Violence against women, whether within families or in communities, has a long history and is primarily committed by men. Some women are denied reproductive rights. The movements and ideologies of feminism have a shared goal of achieving gender equality. Trans women have a male sex assignment at birth that does not align with their gender identity, while intersex women were born with sex characteristics that do not fit typical notions of female biology.The spelling of "woman" in English has progressed over the past millennium from wifmann to wimmann to wumman, and finally, the modern spelling woman. In Old English, wifmann meant "woman" (literally "woman-person"), whereas wer meant "man". Mann had a gender-neutral meaning of "human", corresponding to Modern English "person" or "someone"; however, subsequent to the Norman Conquest, man began to be used more in reference to "male human", and by the late 13th century had begun to eclipse usage of the older term wer.[6] The medial labial consonants f and m in wifmann coalesced into the modern form "woman", while the initial element wif, which had also meant "woman", underwent semantic narrowing to the sense of a married woman ("wife"). It is a popular misconception that the term "woman" is etymologically connected to "womb". "Womb" derives from the Old English word wamb meaning "belly, uterus" (modern German retains the colloquial term "wamme" from Old High German wamba for "belly, paunch, lap").In linguistics, a word of a spoken language can be defined as the smallest sequence of phonemes that can be uttered in isolation with objective or practical meaning. Or in other terms, a word is a combination of letters. For many languages, words also correspond to sequences of graphemes ("letters") in their standard writing systems that are delimited by spaces wider than the normal inter-letter space, or by other graphical conventions. The concept of "word" is usually distinguished from that of a morpheme, which is the smallest unit of speech which has a meaning, even if it will not stand on its own.In many languages, the notion of what constitutes a "word" may be mostly learned as part of learning the writing system. This is the case of the English language, and of most languages that are written with alphabets derived from the ancient Latin or Greek alphabets.Biology is the natural science that studies life and living organisms, including their physical structure, chemical processes, molecular interactions, physiological mechanisms, development and evolution. Despite the complexity of the science, certain unifying concepts consolidate it into a single, coherent field. Biology recognizes the cell as the basic unit of life, genes as the basic unit of heredity, and evolution as the engine that propels the creation and extinction of species. Living organisms are open systems that survive by transforming energy and decreasing their local entropy to maintain a stable and vital condition defined as homeostasis. Sub-disciplines of biology are defined by the research methods employed and the kind of system studied: theoretical biology uses mathematical methods to formulate quantitative models while experimental biology performs empirical experiments to test the validity of proposed theories and understand the mechanisms underlying life and how it appeared and evolved from non-living matter about 4 billion years ago through a gradual increase in the complexity of the system. King, or king regnant, is the title given to a male monarch in a variety of contexts. The female equivalent is queen regnant,[1] while the title of queen on its own usually refers to the consort of a king. In the context of prehistory, antiquity and contemporary indigenous peoples, the title may refer to tribal kingship. Germanic kingship is cognate with Indo-European traditions of tribal rulership (c.f. Indic rajan, Gothic reiks, and Old Irish rí, etc.). In the context of classical antiquity, king may translate in Latin as rex and in Greek as archon or basileus. In classical European feudalism, the title of king as the ruler of a kingdom is understood to be the highest rank in the feudal order, potentially subject, at least nominally, only to an emperor (harking back to the client kings of the Roman Republic and Roman Empire). In a modern context, the title may refer to the ruler of one of a number of modern monarchies (either absolute or constitutional). The title of king is used alongside other titles for monarchs: in the West, emperor, grand prince, prince, archduke, duke or grand duke, and in the Islamic world, malik, sultan, emir or hakim, etc.[3] The term king may also refer to a king consort, a title that is sometimes given to the husband of a ruling queen, but the title of prince consort is sometimes granted instead.A queen regnant (plural: queens regnant) is a female monarch, equivalent in rank to a king, who reigns in her own right, as opposed to a queen consort, who is the wife of a reigning king, or a queen regent, who is the guardian of a child monarch and reigns temporarily in the child's stead. An empress regnant is a female monarch who reigns in her own right over an empire. A queen regnant possesses and exercises sovereign powers, whereas a queen consort shares her husband's rank and titles, but does not share the sovereignty of her husband. The husband of a queen regnant traditionally does not share his wife's rank, title or sovereignty. However, the concept of a king consort is not unheard of in both contemporary and classical periods. A queen dowager is the widow of a king. A queen mother is a queen dowager who is also the mother of a reigning sovereign.Chemistry is the scientific discipline involved with elements and compounds composed of atoms, molecules and ions: their composition, structure, properties, behavior and the changes they undergo during a reaction with other substances.[1][2][3] In the scope of its subject, chemistry occupies an intermediate position between physics and biology.[4] It is sometimes called the central science because it provides a foundation for understanding both basic and applied scientific disciplines at a fundamental level.[5] For example, chemistry explains aspects of plant chemistry (botany), the formation of igneous rocks (geology), how atmospheric ozone is formed and how environmental pollutants are degraded (ecology), the properties of the soil on the moon (cosmochemistry), how medications work (pharmacology), and how to collect DNA evidence at a crime scene (forensics).Jadoon and Malik, Biochem Pharmacol (Los Angel) 2018, 7:2 DOI: 10.4172/2167-0501.1000246 emistry och & Bi en Acce Op ss y: armacolog Ph Biochemistry & Pharmacology: Open Access ISSN: 2167-0501 Review Article Open Access A Comprehensive Review Article on Isoprostanes as Biological Markers Saima Jadoon* and Arif Malik Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan Abstract Various obsessive procedures include free radical intervened oxidative anxiety. The elaboration of solid and nonintrusive strategies for the assessment of oxidative worry in human body is a standout amongst the most critical strides towards perceiving the assortment of oxidative disorders apparently created by Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS). Lipid peroxidation is a standout amongst the most well-known components related with oxidative anxiety, and the estimation of lipid peroxidation items has been utilized to assess oxidative worry in vivo conditions. The estimation of conjugated dienes and lipid hydro peroxide, while the evaluation of optional final results incorporates thiobarbituric acid reactive substances, vaporous alkanes and prostaglandin F2-like items, named F2-isoprostanes (F2-iPs). As of late, F2-iPs have been viewed as the most significant, precise and solid marker of oxidative worry in vivo and their evaluation is suggested for surveying oxidant wounds in people. The motivation behind this paper is to give some data on organic chemistry of isoprostanes and their use as a marker of oxidative anxiety. Keywords: Lipid peroxidation; Prostaglandin F2; Conjugated products; Arachidonic acid metabolites Introduction Isoprostanes are formed from unsaturated hydrocarbons and are catalyzed by free radicals. Isoprostanes show the formation of different stereo-isomers. They normally show characteristics such as biotic change, mainly on the lungs and kidneys, and useful for normal functions of body. They are very important as makers for oxidative stress. Few decades ago in 1967, Isoprostanes were prepared in the laboratory but it came out clearly understandable that they were set up in suitable in vivo and had significant biotech effects. The first isoprostane discovered in 1990 were F2-isoprostanes. Other types of isoprostanes include D2-isoprostanes, E2-isoprostanes, A2isoprostanes, J2-isoprostanes [1]. Isoprostanes and Prostaglandins undifferentiated from prostaglandins PGF2 to recognize upgraded rates of lipid peroxidation. In mid-1970, production of Prostaglandins (PG) like mixes amid auto-oxidation of polyunsaturated and unsaturated fats was found, however isoprostanes were not found in people. Until 1990, F2-isoprostanes were thought as constituents of 64 mixes of different isomeric structures. Additional type of isoprostanes delivered in vivo by order of obligated prostaglandins PGH2-like isoprostane or intermediates [5]. Incorporate E2-isoprostane and D2-isoprostanes, cyclopentenone-A2 and J2-isoprostanes, and the exceedingly responsive non-cyclic ketoaldehydes (isoketals). Biological impacts of Isoprostanes (IsoPs) are settled by correspondence with receptor. The cyclopentenone - Isoprostane (IsoPs) for instance Prostaglandin (PGA2) and Prostaglandin (PGJ2) like mixes. The Isoprostanes (IsoPs) way instantly adduct to lysine stays on proteins and initiate crosslinkages. It`s still dubious about the receptors required in Isoprostanes (IsoPs) activities. The vasoconstricting activity is interceded through Thromboxane (Tx) receptor contender [6]. There are some dissimilarity between Prostaglandins (PG) and isoprostanes. Prostaglandins are made from arachidonic acid, while isoprostanes are formed on lipid membranes from polyunsaturated fatty acids and then they are set free by phospholipases. Isoprostanes are also formed from docosahexaenoic and eicosapentaenoic acids. Prostaglandins (PG) are a trans isomer while isoprostane is mainly cis. Isoprostanes are similar to the common prostanoids in distinct manners and the most accessible form is similar to Postaglandin F2. Prostaglandin (PGD2) and Prostaglandin (PGE2) are also found in similar way but particularly they are different in their stereochemistry [2]. To differentiate between isoprostanes and prostaglandins, we use different abbreviations like PG for prostaglandin and IsoPs for isoprostanes. The different positions of hydroxyl group in the ring help to identify different Isoprostanes structures [3]. The recuperation of Isoprostanes (IsoPs) has vital importance for medication. It has now been shaped that estimation of F2-isoprostanes is the most dependable way to deal with survey oxidative anxiety status in vivo, giving a critical instrument to look in to the part of biochemical worry in the form of infection in human beings. In addition, measures of the isoprostane way have been found to apply solid organic activities. IsoPs like 8-iso-PGF2 and 8-iso-PGE2 have solid natural impacts in different frame works and they additionally fill in as arbiters of oxidant worry through their vasoconstrictive and energizing properties. 8-isoPGF2 have been notable to have vasoconstrictive impacts in different organs including aorta, cerebrum cerebral arterioles, kidney, the lung, aspiratory supply route, retinal vessels and endothelium [7]. Biochemistry and Metabolism of Isoprostanes *Corresponding author: Jadoon S, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan, Tel: +96 4751 0307184; E-mail: saima.jadoon95@gmail.com Isoprostanes (IsoPs) are generated in situ in their esterified frame in tissues and by converted first to their free corrosive shape and are conveyed in both the esterifies and free corrosive frame in tissues [4]. Isoprostanes (IsoPs) are groups of Prostaglandins (PG) like compounds. They are produced by free radical catalyzed peroxidation of arachidonic acid and independent of cyclooxygenase. Isoprostanes (IsoPs) are created in situ in the phospholipid space of cell layers. The estimation of F2-isoprostanes; containing the F-sort ring Biochem Pharmacol, an open access journal ISSN:2167-0501 Received: December 28, 2017; Accepted: April 24, 2018; Published April 30, 2018 Citation: Jadoon S, Malik A (2018) A Comprehensive Review Article on Isoprostanes as Biological Markers. Biochem Pharmacol (Los Angel) 7: 246. doi: 10.4172/21670501.1000246 Copyright: © 2018 Jadoon S, et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. Volume 7 • Issue 2 • 1000246 Citation: Jadoon S, Malik A (2018) A Comprehensive Review Article on Isoprostanes as Biological Markers. Biochem Pharmacol (Los Angel) 7: 246. doi: 10.4172/2167-0501.1000246 Page 2 of 8 Isoprostanes actuate irritation and atherogenesis through enactment of MAP (Mitogen Activated Protein) kinases. Isoprostanes have vital in vitro exercises that could be dependent to the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis. It bolsters platelet enactment and actuates mutagenesis in vascular smooth muscle cells affect proliferative reactions in fibroblasts, changes endothelial cell science as exhibit by proliferative impacts and expanded endothelin-1 expression in ox-like aortic endothelial cells. It has been sought that Isoprostanes (IsoPs) are oxidative anxiety creators as well as naturally dynamic. When they are discharged from cell layers by phosholipases flow in the plasma in free structures and, in this manner, can initiate film receptors. 15-F2t-IsoP is a fractional against at the TP (Thromboxane Prostanoid) receptor on platelets and, hence, it may control the proaggregatory impact of TP receptor incitement [8]. This has inspected resulting impact of 8-iso-PGF2 (alpha), 8-iso-PGF2 (beta) and 8-iso-PGF3 (alpha) on human respiratory system. Both 8-iso-PGF2 (alpha) and 8-iso-PGF2 (beta) shaped focus subordinate with drawls of smooth muscle from human extensive and little aviation route. This research has impact of isoprostanes on human birth cord supply route (HUA) in vitro. Birth code is connection between baby and mother placenta. Quantitative constrictions were shaped by 8-isoPGE2, 8-iso-PGE1, 8-iso-PGF (alpha), 8-iso-PGF2 (alpha), 8-iso-PGF2 (beta). The consideration by the shrinking movement of 8-iso-PGF2 (alpha) and 8-iso-PGE2 was calculated in the confined rodent on the upper part of stomach, detached rodent aorta and the segregated guinea pig middle part of small intestine differentiate with the Thromboxin (TX) A2-mimetic U46619 and the customary prostaglandin PGE2. In the confined rodent aorta 8-iso-PGE2, 8-iso-PGF2 (alpha) prompted vasoconstrictions in a fixation subordinate way [9]. By correlation of the pEC50 values the accompanying rank request of impact was settled: U 46619 > 8-iso-PGE2 > 8-iso-PGF2 (alpha) > PGE2 in the disconnected rodent gastric fundus, the rank request of impact settled by correlation of the pEC50 was: PGE2 > 8-iso-PGE2 > U 46619 > 8-iso-PGF2 (alpha). In the concealed guinea-pig ileum, U 46619 and 8-iso-PGF2 (alpha) had no impact, while PGE2, 8-iso-PGE2 created focus subordinate withdrawal [10]. Synthesis in Animal Tissues Union of isoprostanes in individual tissues in vivo is realized by a progression of free radical-catalyzed responses, a large portion of which don't include compounds and any unsaturated fats. Keeping in mind the end goal to begin isoprostane arrangement, prerequisite for responsive oxygen species, for example, peroxyl radicals, singlet oxygen etc under vigorous conditions in vivo in creatures and plants. The shaped expanding sums under states of oxidative anxiety. The radical created during this process is non- enzymatic, all methylene assemblage between two cis two fold bonds can conceivably include [11]. The pentadienyl radical an enantiomer mixture peroxy radical that tends to reorganize a shape equal sums alpha-alpha and beta-beta-bicyclic endoperoxy radicals who are arranged solely cis regarding the cyclopentane ring. Later, the bicyclic endoperoxy radical responds with a further oxygen particle to deliver racemic hydroperoxyl bicyclic endoperoxy radicals. The item is an isoprostane IsoPG that is comparable of PGG2, which can be reduced to the firm F2-IsoP [12]. Comparative responses happen to shape isoprostanes with the hydroxyl assemble in positions 5, 8 or 12. Isoprostanes of the IsoPF arrangement are framed in restricted sums just in vitro, however are significant metabolites in vivo, through the decline in IsoPGs by means of characteristic endogenous reductions for instance; glutathione, hematin, lipoic corrosive, unsaturated fat or glutathione peroxidase. Thromboxane-like mixes are created in vivo at the point when the biosynthesis of isoprostanes proceeds by means of this endoperoxide course, every one of the 64 conceivable Biochem Pharmacol, an open access journal ISSN:2167-0501 stereoisomers can be shaped. As the G and H – ring endoperoxide structures are profoundly capable mixes with a half-existence of just a couple of minutes, they can isomerize quickly to form different items, including analogs of PGE2 and PGD2 [13]. They created intensely with F2-isoprostanes. For instance; Glutathione (GSH) or a-tocopherol, are utilized arrangement of E2/D2-IsoPs is favored. The isoprostanes contains cyclopentenone rings, which is carbonyl gathering on the prostane ring and intimize to PGA2 and PGJ2. They are profoundly responsive electrophiles and act as nucleophile with addition of thiols, for example, found on cysteine stays in proteins and glutathione conjugates. As the isoprostanes in individual tissues are delivered from arachidonic corrosive transcendently in position 2 of phospholipids in layers, they should be discharged by the activity of phospholipase A2 and related proteins before they can apply their principle physiological impacts. In the free corrosive shape, they can flow in the plasma and speak with film receptors [14]. Anyhow, it is conceivable that likewise have some natural capacities while still identified with phospholipids. Isoprostanes have all the earmarks of being disbanded by simple enzymatic component. Circling F2-isoprostanes are depleted in the kidney and develop in the urine for example; 2, 3 – dinor – 15 – F2and 2, 3 – dinor – 5, 6 – dihydro – 15 – F2 – isoprostanes, which are additionally discharged in the pee [15]. In spite of the fact that the amalgamation of prostanoids by COX first requires that arachidonic corrosive release from the plasma layer by phospholipases. It is not acceptable for the creation of isoprostanes by free radicals and presently justifiable cause motivation to trust that the last can follow up on free unsaturated fats and on those still esterified to film phospholipids. Isoprostanes have been recognized inside phospholipids extricated from surgical examples of lung, atherosclerotic vasculature, lymphatics, mind, and preeclampsia deciduas in the maternal part of placenta [16]. In plasma of smokers the degree of esterified isoprostanes increase benchmark for a considerable length of time after suspension of smoking, despite the fact that different markers of smoking, for example, urinary nicotine and cotinine get to be distinctly imperceptible. In carbon tetrachloride incited hepatotoxicity, isoprostanes start to aggregate very quickly in phospholipids separated from the liver (and to some degree in the lungs and kidney) and presently in the course; the last achieve a crest at 4 h (77-overlap) and remain extraordinarily raised above standard at 24 (21-crease) and 48 (10-overlay) h, showing delayed oxidative anxiety as well as progressing entrance of esterified isoprostanes. The nearness of the isoprostanes inside the layer depends upon film smoothness [17]. Isoprostanes give off an impression of being immediately metabolized and distributed. It was demonstrated in the rabbit, that a dose of 8-iso-PGF2a was quickly diffused, with a half-existence of consumption of approximately one min, and after that was highly intoxicated, with a half-existence of approximately 4 min. By using HPLC, the further study shows that 8-iso-PGF2a was debased to a few ß-oxidized metabolites, coming full circle in arrangement of a-tetranor-15-keto-13, 14-dihydro-8-iso-PGF2a. It is speculate that digestion system of this Isoprostane be like a flowing pathway like that found out for prostaglandins. Including the formation of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase by oxidation of C-15, decrease of the C-13, 14 twofold bond by 15hydroxy prostaglandin took after by ß-oxidation to a-tetranor-15-keto-13, 14-dihydro-8-isoPGF2a. The parent 8-iso-PGF2a and product of metabolism begun to a mass in the urine inside 20 min; 80% of the first radioactive dot was present in the urine by 4 h [18]. This investigation using a solitary human come forward and a rhesus monkey; The 75% of the infused radioactivity was excreted in to the urine during the following 4.5 Volume 7 • Issue 2 • 1000246 Citation: Jadoon S, Malik A (2018) A Comprehensive Review Article on Isoprostanes as Biological Markers. Biochem Pharmacol (Los Angel) 7: 246. doi: 10.4172/2167-0501.1000246 Page 3 of 8 h and mix parent urine, with the essential product of metabolism being 2,3-dinor-5,6-dihydro-PGF2a. It is demonstrated that the metabolites likewise incorporate 2, 3-dinor-PGF2a in people and 2, 3, 4, 5-tetranor-5, 6-dihydro-PGF2a in rats. The synthetically responsive isoeicosanoids, for example, the A2-and isolevuglandins covalently adduct to proteins and are along these lines shielded from fast freedom by means of the kidney [19]. Isoprostanes as Markers of Oxidative Stress Oxidative anxiety indicates elevation of Responsive Oxygen Species (ROS) and cell reinforcement guard. Responsive oxygen species are created endogenously but they are produced by exogenous components, for example, radiation, tobacco smoke and medications. It is realized that oxidative anxiety is related with numerous intense and endless sicknesses, for example, tumor and cardiovascular, neurodegenerative and lung illnesses. These days, a few in vitro oxidative anxiety markers are accessible; however they need affectability as well as specificity, or require intrusive strategies [20]. The quantity present in composers has endeavored to decide their amount in natural specimens in clinical disorders, most likely connected with oxidative anxiety, has kept on expanding. Till now, it is notable that IsoP levels are expanded in natural examples on account of various cardiovascular, aspiratory and neurological maladies The utilization of isoprostanes as markers of oxidative anxiety has few points of interest over other oxidative anxiety markers, i.e., isoprostanes are particular results of peroxidation, they are available in noticeable sums in tissues and organic liquids, and they are unchanged by lipid substance in an eating regimen. Since accumulation of pee is non-intrusive and on the grounds that isoprostanes are exceptionally steady in pee [21]. There is an interesting speculation that amid advancement in primitive cells, isoprostane development came about because of the expanding vigorous conditions and these particles were chosen as a method for flagging more particular uneven characters in the redox condition of the cells. The Isoprostane arrangement has been held as a move down framework where enzymatic passage develops to generate eicosanoids as flagging particles. Isoprostanes are accepted to be beneficial markers of oxidative worry for animals and human being tissues, which are characterized as "an unsettling influence in the prooxidant–antioxidant for adjustment. There is an unnecessary generation of lipid peroxidation items, which might be included in the advancement or worsening of malignant tumor, cardiovascular and neurological sicknesses. They can be examined in every single organic liquid and tissues. In patients the level of oxidative worry is measure by isoprostanes and their metabolites in urine is a solid non-obtrusive way to deal. In its measuring method there is no need of storage at -70 º C, or to be worried about further art factual development of isoprostanes on capacity [22]. The level of isoprostanes impact on sickness states and resulting helpful intercession can be resolved. The level of Isoprostane is measured in conditions that are related with intemperate era of free radicals like incorporating harming with paraquat and carbon tetrachloride, smoking, liquor addiction and cirrhosis of the liver. Numerous human infection states, including cerebrum degeneration, kidney illnesses, ischemia-reperfusion harm, atherosclerosis and diabetes are involved in the pathophysiology [23]. There is a great clinical proof that the centralization of F2-IsoPs in urine is a free and aggregate indicator of coronary disease, showing classification of this metabolite in atherosclerotic plaques, where like the thromboxane it might enact the TP (Thromboxane) receptor. In type 2, diabetes is a solid pointer of oxidative worry. Lipid peroxidation is also indicator of numerous illness states related to mind, In the Isoprostane pathway the IsoPA2 Biochem Pharmacol, an open access journal ISSN:2167-0501 and IsoPJ2 are typically thought to be the favored results and they affect neuronal apoptosis and compound neurodegeneration brought about by different put-down at fixations as low as 0.1µM. The useful gathering of the cyclopentenone isoprostanes can respond with the cysteine deposit of glutathione. The cysteine in cell proteins shows the harmful effect [24]. Isoprostanes and isofurans and neuroprostanes can be determined from arachidonate. It is obtained from docosahexaenoic corrosive. It has appeared in increment in fixation in unhealthy districts of brains from patients who have suffered in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's infections. In the early phases of Alzheimer's and Huntington's illnesses there is an additional level of cerebrospinal liquid. The investigation is of symptomatic esteem and support for evaluation of case treatments. As the level F2 isoprostanes expanded under states of oxidative stress, they might be a specific marker of white matter damage in vivo. The lifted focuses in mind tissues influenced by injury are recognized by D2 and E2-isoprostanes [25]. It has turned out to be clear that in plasma and tissues the isoprostane levels elevated in plasma and tissues of fetal and early neonatal life in contrast with grown-ups and that they may have vital parts being developed and move to interval of life. The accepted imperative wellspring of isoprostanes is placenta. The viability of cancer prevention agents in vivo and to set up the estimation of cell reinforcement organization in clinical cases can be evaluated by urinary Isoprostane. The vitamin E and more prominent a-tocopherol is needed for cancer effectual hindrance agent in displaying the measurements of 0.04mg/day and F2-IsoP levels has been utilized to concentrate the vitamin E specially in the form of a-tocopherol. In people with shockingly levels of vitamin C supplements decreases the level of isoprostane [26]. Furthermore, their esterified frame films, isoprostanes are enduring markers of oxidative harm and they empower the site to be distinguished by endogenous lipid peroxidation. To be sure, it is conceivable that in this shape they have consequences for the ease of films and might be in charge of some layer brokenness. For some reasons, isoprostanes are extremely appropriate as markers of oxidative anxiety. Initially, there quantity can be measured to picomolar levels with logical strategies, for example, HPLC, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, or radioimmunoassay. The previous two systems are remarkably ready to segregate between the diverse sorts of isoprostanes [27]. The less demanding instrument to perform experiments which is generally financially accessible is Radioimmunoassay. In the case of diverse sorts of isoprostanes are these are not capable to recognize the prostanoids and the isoprostanes. It is conceivable to utilize isoprostanes to evaluate oxidative anxiety or harm in particular target organs of intrigue (e.g., by means of biopsy); for instance, in carbon tetrachloride-initiated hepatoxicity, isoprostanes were notably lifted in the liver, lung, and kidney however not in the mind or heart [28]. They supported segregated specimens of body liquids; their nearness was initially identified in crisp and put away examples of plasma and urine. The especially energizing late advancement has exhibit and recognized the lung diseases, extremely not allowed to spread in the body course to their estimation. Their deliberate qualities don't display diurnal varieties however do differ especially in clinical and test situation portrayed by oxidative anxiety. The respiratory diseases are related with isoprostanes. 8-iso-PGF2a is created in considerable sums in something else "ordinary" people presented to tobacco smoke, allergen, ozone), or hyperoxia and amid oxygenated ischemia particularly goes up in patients with a broad variety of lung diseases. Like asthma, ceaseless obstructive pneumonic illness, interstitial lung ailment, cystic fibrosis, intense lung harm including intense respiratory misery disorder, and extreme respiratory disappointment Volume 7 • Issue 2 • 1000246 Citation: Jadoon S, Malik A (2018) A Comprehensive Review Article on Isoprostanes as Biological Markers. Biochem Pharmacol (Los Angel) 7: 246. doi: 10.4172/2167-0501.1000246 Page 4 of 8 in babies [29]. Also, various cardiovascular conditions highlight stamped heights in isoprostane levels, including renal syndrome, pain in chest and damaging tissues; dangerous pain in heart area, disappointment coronary illness atherosclerosis and preeclampsia. The level of isoprostane increases in aspiratory high blood pressure and amid introduction to operators is related with high blood pressure, for example, suppressor measurements of angiotensin II fiery. The 8-isoPGF2a observed to be a helpful marker of oxidative stress and lipid peroxides in illness conditions, various Alzheimer's infection, Sclerosis diabetes mellitus systemic, auto immune diseases, and cirrhosis, alcoholic liver disease and in test settings running from people in space flight to sled mutts amid continuance practice preparing [30]. F2T-ISOPM, F2-ISOPS, Obesity and Breast Cancer Risk No review has tentatively explored the etiologic part of F2IsoP and its metabolite in the improvement of bosom or different diseases. Drs. Milne and Marrow’s worked to utilize breast cancer as a malady display. The relationship of urinary F2-IsoP and 15-F2tIsopM, by using the instrument like Gas Chromatography -Negative Ion Chemical Ionization Mass Spectroscopy (GC-NICI-MS) test, with bosom growth hazard in a settled case-control contemplate. In the course of recent years, various reviews have reliably watched that overweight or corpulent ladies had a fundamentally lifted level of F2-IsoPs, demonstrating ladies with an abnormal state of Body Mass Index (BMI) have an exorbitant creation of ROS which cause oxidative anxiety. In this way, among overweight/large ladies, elevated amounts of 15-F2t-IsopM and additionally F2-IsoPs might be identified with an expanded danger of breast cancer. Alternately, among ladies with typical Body Mass Index (BMI), minimum level of ROS is important to activate p53 enactment, specifically intervene cell death and incite agedness. Also, F2-IsoPs found to build the glucose-initiated blend of TGF-ß1, a basic tumor silencer at introductory level [31]. It is, along these lines, not amazing that few defensive elements for bosom growth hazard, for example, physical action, equality (typical pregnancy) and preeclampsia were connected to essentially hoisted levels of lipid peroxidation. In view of these discoveries, it is conceivable that the part of ROS among ladies with a typical BMI (Body Mass Index) might be unique in relation to overweight/large ladies. We, in this way, conjectured the relationship between levels of F2-IsoPs and 15-F2tIsopM and bosom malignancy may shift by BMI status and further assessed this speculation in the SWHS. Urinary levels of 15-F2t-IsopM and F2-IsoPs did not fundamentally vary by bosom tumor status. Levels of F2-IsoPs and 15-F2t-IsopM were identified with a decreased danger of bosom malignancy among ladies with a BMI less than 25. The ladies having BMI less than 23, high level of F2-IsoPs. It is related with a diminished danger of bosom tumor in a dosage reaction way (p for pattern, 0.006) with an overall risk stroke of 0.46 (95%CI: 0.26– 0.80) [32]. Among ladies with a low BMI, the diminishment in hazard showed up in both pre-and post-menopausal ladies. Conversely, 15-F2t-IsopM and F2-IsoPs were related with an expanded danger of bosom tumor among ladies with a BMI=25. The affiliations got to be distinctly more grounded with expanding levels of BMI. 15-F2t-IsopM was connected to a 2-to 4-overlay lifted hazard among ladies with a BMI more than 27.5; the ORs raised to 10.20 (95% CI: 2.35–44.29) for the center tertile and 10.27 (2.41–43.80) for the most elevated tertile versus the most reduced tertile (p for pattern, 0.003) (p for cooperation with BMI (BMI<29 versus BMI=29), 0.0004) among ladies with a BMI=29. The comparing ORs (95% CIs) additionally lifted to 13.62 (1.38–134.08) and 23.47 (2.46–223.69) (p for communication, 0.001) among those with a BMI of at least 30. Fundamentally the same as Biochem Pharmacol, an open access journal ISSN:2167-0501 results were acquired in the affectability investigation barring bosom tumor quiet analyzed inside 3 years from pee accumulation. The ROS is responsible for bosom malignancy is distinctive by BMI position and 15-F2t-IsopM is a more delicate and particular biomarker of oxidative worries than F2-IsoPs among overweight/corpulent subjects [33]. SOPS as Biomarkers of Lipid Peroxidation in Neurodegenerative Disorder Oxidative anxiety is generated by an irregularity of free radicals generation and cell reinforcement protections for the oxidation and prompts to lipid peroxidation, layer protein and DNA harm and is thought to be essential to cause diseases of an assortment of neurological issue, particularly neurodegenerative sicknesses and tumor maturing. The most vital wellspring of ROS intervened, specifically harms neuronal layers and yields various auxiliary items in charge of broad cell harm. A particular repair procedure of lipid peroxidation does not survive as it achieve for proteins and DNA. The level of lipid peroxidation could have physiological criticalness for cell flagging and film renovating [34]. The mind is the most helpless to oxidative harm in light of various elements like high oxygen utilization, the low levels of cancer prevention agent chemicals, the lifted levels of iron and the capacity to oxidize distinctive substrates. Regardless of the way that free radicals can assault numerous different basic natural atoms, for example, DNA and cell proteins. Peroxidation of film lipids influences neuronal homeostasis bringing about increased layer firmness, lessened action of film bound compounds (e.g., Na pump), devastation of film receptors, and changing porous [35]. The way of ROS is unsteady and exceedingly receptive. There are many challenges in direct measurement of RO level. It is difficult to explain the significance of oxidative harm in neurological infections. Due to this reason the measurement of F2-IsoPs by mass spectrometry instrument is commonly used. It measures the best quality level list of lipid peroxidation in vivo. IsoPs found moderately in body liquids since they are regularly found in pee, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid are additionally present in the breathed out. The development of IsoPs in vivo can be dependably checked in each organic liquid without using any instrument. The estimations of particular signs of lipid peroxidation, which have a tendency to be delicate particularly [36]. The estimation of F2-IsoPs in vivo go up and show up as the most solid ways to deal with survey oxidative anxiety status, giving an essential apparatus to investigate the part of oxidative worry in the infective human. In the oxidative tissue harm the level of F2-IsoP is altogether expanding. The fast improvement of explanatory strategies for IsoPs estimation cleared up the part of the free radicals in human physiology and disorder in philology system cause different diseases. Estimation of F4-NPs, steady result of ROS harm and Docoshexaenoic Acid (DHA), additionally gives significant information in investigating the part of oxidative worry in neurodegenerative maladies. The results of the IsoP passage have solid natural activities and take physiological arbiters of the illness [37]. Research on cerebrum determined IsoPs has given persuading proof on the helpfulness of these markers in comprehension part of oxidative harm in mind infections. IsoPs are dynamic results of ROS which moderates the oxidation of (Arachidonic Acid) AA which contained in phospholipids of cell layers. The lipoproteins have a potential pertinence to harm the sheath of myelin and neurons maladies in human. The ROS harm the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative tissue. The raised development of F2-IsoPs can be seen in mind tissues and body liquids in various neurodegenerative ailments. The estimation of free F2-IsoPs in plasma or urine can be used to evaluate the endogenic development of IsoPs however not to uncover the organ in which Volume 7 • Issue 2 • 1000246 Citation: Jadoon S, Malik A (2018) A Comprehensive Review Article on Isoprostanes as Biological Markers. Biochem Pharmacol (Los Angel) 7: 246. doi: 10.4172/2167-0501.1000246 Page 5 of 8 they are framed. Deciding the levels of IsoPs in the interesting liquid compartment Cerebro Spinal Fluid (CSF), gives an awesome chance to uncover the event of oxidative anxiety and lipid peroxidation in the mind [38]. Multiple Sclerosis Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is heterogeneous illness with a few pathophysiological segments like aggravation, demyelination, redox, axonal harm, and repair forms. MS is a main source of neurological inabilities in youthful grown-ups and influences up to 2.4 of population in USA and Canada and up to 1.9 in some European nations. MS also affects on genes focusing on few bases. There are different clinical courses on this issue. The great degree of backsliding transmitting course Relapsing Remitting Multiple Sclerosis (RRMS) in which backslide happens every now and then followed up by entire or fractional recuperation. This phase of illness is described with multifocal aggravation, oedema, and cytokines activities. About portion of Relapsing Remitting Multiple Sclerosis (RRMS) patients following 120–240 months of illness enduring collect irreparable nervous system disorder. This kind of MS is auxiliary dynamic is kind of Secondary Progressive Multiple Sclerosis (SPMS) that is controlled by nervous system degeneration procedures and movement of scientific side effects. The 20% of MS patients have dynamic side effects from the beginning of onset essential dynamic Primary Progressive Multiple Sclerosis (PPMS) sort [39]. The movement of RRMS to dynamic stage is dependable on injury in brain. Right now characterizations of indicators of MS are associated with the physiological abnormality forms. It is divided into seven classes: indicator is displayed a single of numerous continuous infective procedures. It was found that the pee IsoPs level was more than 6-over lay hoisted in patients with SPMS than in charge. To examine the conceivable relationship between's F2-IsoPs and the illness incendiary action. The Cerebro Spinal Fluid (CSF) levels of 15-IsoPs in patients with RRMS were not corresponded with the scientific indications of the ailment. The perceptions recommend large amounts of F2-IsoPs may speak to a file of degenerative marvels, which continue likewise in the absence of a progressing provocative action. It is also indicated the level of CSF is dependable indicator of oxidative worry. The level 15- IsoP, is 3 times higher in patients with MS as compare to reference subjects with other disorder of nervous system. In steroid treated patient the level of 15-IsoP level is low. The level of disability is related with the level of 15- IsoP. In the spinal line of mice amid early dynamic phases of test immune system Encephalomyelitis (EAE) the hoisted levels of F2IsoPs and F4-NPs were watched. In white matter and myelin-framing oligo dendrocytes. The moderately low level of the Docosahexaenoic Acid (DHA) levels also influenced the MS. As lipid peroxidation biomarker of F2-IsoPs may be desirable over F4-Neuroprostanes (F4NPs) in the demyelinating ailment [41]. There is the connection found between's levels of F2-IsoPs in CSF of MS patients. The CSF groupings of F2-IsoPs are higher in MS patients. Where the F2-IsoPs levels in patients experiencing MS were moderate between kin, and in addition control [42]. Alzheimer’s Disease 7. Remyelination and repair Neural Cell Grip Particle (NCAM), CNTF (Ciliaryneurotrophic Consider), and CPK-BB (Creatine Phosphatase BB) [40]. Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is one of the serious sources of mental illness. It is identified by the accumulation of the amyloid ß (Aß) peptide and microtubule-associated protein particle in the brain. The serious part in the AD pathological process activates an abnormal tau phosphorylation. The Aß interaction with transition elements in the form of ions, which play role in lipid peroxidation and cellular oxidative stress. The Amyloid ß-peptide (Aß) grows cellular oxyradicals deposition in neurons and glial cells of brain to harm the brain. In this disease many of metabolic oxidative stress may lead to many of the metabolic and loss the structure and function of brain. In tau phosphorylation, the intervention of oxidant toxicity by Aß has been also involved. Furthermore in the oxidative pressures has been observed in AD and the mitochondrial loss the efficiency of electron transport activity. There is variety of markers of oxidative stress which shows relationship with Aß accumulation and neurofibrillary degeneration in AD patients [43]. During the oxidative stress protein degrees of various antioxidant enzymes were changed in AD brain regions. The F2-IsoPs and F4-NPs levels also increased in the postmortem ventricular fluid of AD patients. The level of CSF F2-IsoPs could not be making use as an early marker of mental illness. There is no correlation between the level of CSF F2-IsoPs and duration of disease. It is proved that in AD patients brain the presence of esterified F4-NPs abnormally high levels in occipital and temporal lobes of brain. In AD patients the vitro oxidation of DHA (Docosahexaenoic Acid) produces 3.4-times higher levels of F4-NPs as compared with F2-IsoPs where the CSF levels of these two classes of compounds showed a very close correlation [44]. According to Yao and Praticò researcher, the concentration of 15-IsoPs and IPF2alpha-VI level increase in the frontal and temporal lobes of AD brains as compared to the same regions of control brains. The levels 6-keto PGF1alpha, an index of prostaglandin production, and ventricular CSF 15-IsoP levels did not differ in AD and control subjects [45]. In MS IsoPs is the hopeful indicator of lipid peroxidation. In ailments of a mind boggling process of pathologic in an individual The level of F2-IsoPs is higher in plasma and urinary levels were higher in AD as compare to control. The increase level of IsoP in 1. The variation of the safe framework (interleukins IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, IL-23, interferon, tumor rot consider Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF), changing development calculate Transforming Growth Factor Beta (TGFß), Cytokines Chemokine Receptor Factor 3/Chemokine Ligand 10 (CXCR3/ CXCL10)—marker enacted Thymus cells; Endothelialselectin, Leukocyte-selectin, ICAM-1(Intracellular Adhesion Molecule-I), VCAM-1(Vascular Cell Adhesion Molecule), Cluster Cluster Differentiation (CD31), surface articulation of Lymphocyte Associated Antigen-l (LFA-1) and Very Late Antigen-4 (VLA-4) (grip atoms), cluster of differentiation-40/ Cluster of Differentiation-40/Cluster of Differentiation 40 Ligand (CD40/CD40L), CD80, CD86, and warm stun proteins) 2. Axonal/neuronal harm (Tau protein, 24S-hydroxycholesterol, N-acetylaspartic corrosive). 3. Blood-cerebrum obstruction disturbance (Network Metalloproteinases (MMPs), Platelet Initiating Component (PAF), and thrombomodulin). 4. Demyelination (MBP and MBP-like material, proteolytic catalysts). 5. Oxidative anxiety and excitotoxicity (nitric oxide subordinates, F2-IsoPs, and uric corrosive). 6. Gliosis (Glial Fibrillary Corrosive Protein (GFAP), S-100 protein). Biochem Pharmacol, an open access journal ISSN:2167-0501 Volume 7 • Issue 2 • 1000246 Citation: Jadoon S, Malik A (2018) A Comprehensive Review Article on Isoprostanes as Biological Markers. Biochem Pharmacol (Los Angel) 7: 246. doi: 10.4172/2167-0501.1000246 Page 6 of 8 plasma and urine in AD patients increase oxidative stress. The level of F2-IsoPs levels in females control group were higher than in males and it is related to greater degree in oxidative stress incorporated with the drop of estrogens in the postmenopausal period [41]. Huntington’s Disease The genetic disease due to anomalous elaboration of an unstable bases cytosine-adenine-guanine repeat region at the 5'-end of a gene on chromosome 4. This genetic abnormality results defect on genes causing the death of specific populations of striatal neurons. The mitochondrial losing the activity of electron transport as result the overproduction of ROS leading to nitrosative stress in HD patients. Such stress contributes to disorder the nervous system and damage DNA, proteins, and lipids [38]. The mitochondrial respiration is inhibited by highly reactive product of nitric oxide and superoxide free radicals -peroxynitrite. This also reduce antioxidant defense system of cells due to this reason the immune reactivity of 3-NT is increased in postmortem HD patients of brain tissue. In striatum and cerebral cortex the levels of protein carbonyls increase. The level of 4-hydroxynonenal and malondialdehyde, lipid peroxidation products, are increased eight times in HD human plasma and also in postmortem brain tissue. The levels of F2-IsoP in HD patients are higher and cause oxidative stress than control group. In HD plasma patients the glutathione levels are significantly reduced. [24]. Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) is a standout in human and Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSEs) or prion maladies, a miscellaneous gathering of tempting, scattered and hereditary issue portrayed mental illness. The sign of nervous system disease trademark neuropathological sign of the illness is the granulose proof of the neurotic type of a cell protein (like in AD-Aß or HD-Huntington). The gathering of the neurotic prior protein is considered a focal occasion and activate a few pathogenic components, in the end coming full circle in the common degenerative diseases of brain [28]. around 2.5-crease higher than in patients with anti-inflammatory issue. It is found that there is no relationship between 15-IsoPs and PGE2. In patients neither the level of 15-IsoP levels nor polymorphism at codon 129 of the prion protein quality, showing that lipid peroxidation and prostaglandin blend are insignificant wonders of this illness. In controls Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) fixations are 6.5-overlay higher and contrarily related with patient life. The level of 15- IsoP is not related with the illness of patient. It has been suggested that t oxidative worry t pathogenesis of this specific infection is more serious [15, 25]. It is demonstrated in different reviews that the elevation of PGE2 in brain memory part is related with COX-2, which is lifted with movement of disease and is restricted to glial cells. In sporadic CJD patients the shorter survival was related with more elevated amounts of PGE2. In CSF patients PGE2 might be a case of serious disease as opposed to movement, in light of the fact that PGE2 levels are not depend on CSF investigating throughout illness. PGE2 can be related with neuronal demise, in light of the fact that in malignant cells, infected protein peptides addition of PGE2 highness and Cyclo Oxygenase-l (COX-1) prohibitory ensures opposition of infected protein poisonous. Anyhow PGE2 adds to neuron cells demise in CJD, is a result of neuronal cell death. It is only a record of the illness condition stays to be set up (Figure 1 and 2) [41]. Conclusion Isoprotane is the product of lipid peroxidation in cell membrane. It is reliable biomarker of oxidative stress. Isoprostane disrupt the The biological elements of cell like prion protein is obscure; in any case, because of its cooper restricting capacity it may assume an essential part in the oxidative homeostasis of the mind and could go about as a cancer prevention agent. These cancer prevention agent properties might be identified with its Superoxide Dismutase-(SOD-) like action. This has been demonstrated that elevated amounts of prion protein in cell. This makes the cell impervious for oxidative anxiety. The degree of a few oxidative anxiety markers and gatherings of protein carbonyl are results of lipid peroxidation. They were expanded in cerebrum tissues of prion protein. It had been found the scarpie contaminated mind of mice, increase levels of nitrotyrosine and heme oxygenase-1. More prion proteins decreased SOD-like action in the creature in which the recommended that level of lipid peroxidation items is expanded in brains of scrapie contaminated mice [31]. In different cases the increased degrees of F2-IsoP in Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) of Creutzfeldt-Jakob patients have been seen. The variation as compare to control has been observed to be unchanged in CSF from patients experiencing Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) is result of lipid peroxidation. The non-demanded controls were more helpless to oxidation in CSF lipids from patients experiencing CJD. It is observed that cancer prevention agents and the measure of PUFAs levels decrease of in the CJD patients where oxidative anxiety is raise. The pathogenesis of this disease is related to oxidative system. It has been observed that in patients with sporadic and hereditary CJD, CSF levels of 15- IsoP were Biochem Pharmacol, an open access journal ISSN:2167-0501 Figure 1: Isoprostane is group of postaglandin like compound. These are products of free radicals with arachidonic acid including arachidonic esters in phosopholipids. The product form on cell membrane is called lipid peroxidation. It’s reliable biomarker to express the oxidative stress. Isoprostanes disrupts the biological cell membrane. Isoprostane product is rapidly cleaved, metabolized and excrete from cell. Normal function of Isoprostane is not only to acts as vasoconstrictor but it also indicate to promote mutagenesis. The cell adhesion moncytes promote the induction of endothelial cell necrosis. Volume 7 • Issue 2 • 1000246 Citation: Jadoon S, Malik A (2018) A Comprehensive Review Article on Isoprostanes as Biological Markers. Biochem Pharmacol (Los Angel) 7: 246. doi: 10.4172/2167-0501.1000246 Page 7 of 8 20. Zhang R, Zhang Q, Niu J, Lu K, Xie B, et al. (2014) Screening of microRNAs associated with Alzheimer’s disease using oxidative stress cell model and different strains of senescence accelerated mice. J Neurol Sci 338: 57-64. 21. Jacob KD, Noren Hooten N, Trzeciak AR, Evans MK (2013) Markers of oxidant stress that are clinically relevant in aging and age-related disease. Mech Ageing 134: 139-157. Figure 2: Different ring structures of Isoprostanes. biological cell membrane. Isoprostane promotes the mutagenesis typically IsoAP2 and IsoPJ2 favored the isoprostanes pathways. The postaglandin like Iso (F2-IPS) F2 isoprostanes is the most solid and precise biomarker of oxidative stress. References 1. Enciu AM, Gherghiceanu M, Popescu BO (2013) Triggers and effectors of oxidative stress at blood-brain barrier level: Relevance for brain ageing and neurodegeneration. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2013: 297512 22. Farooqui AA, Horrocks LA, Farooqui T (2007) Interactions between neural membrane glycerophospholipid and sphingolipid mediators: A recipe for neural cell survival or suicide. J Neurosci Res 85: 1834-1850. 23. Gonsette RE (2008) Neurodegeneration in multiple sclerosis: The role of oxidative stress and excitotoxicity. J Neurol Sci 274: 48-53. 24. Halliwell B, Lee CY (2010) Using isoprostanes as biomarkers of oxidative stress: Some rarely considered issues. Antioxid Redox Signal 13: 145-156. 25. Barrera G (2012) Oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation products in cancer progression and therapy. ISRN Oncol: 137289. 26. Dotan Y, Lichtenberg D, Pinchuk I (2004) Lipid peroxidation cannot be used as a universal criterion of oxidative stress. Progress in Lipid Research 43: 200-227. 2. Niki E (2008) Lipid peroxidation products as oxidative stress biomarkers. BioFactors 34:171-180. 27. Milne GL, Yin H, Hardy KD, Davies SS, Roberts LJ (2011) Isoprostane generation and function. Chem Rev 111: 5973-5996. 3. Santos R, Almodovar CR, Bulteau AL, Gomes CM (2013) Neurodegeneration, neurogenesis, and oxidative stress. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2013: 730581. 28. Roberts LJ II, Morrow JD (2002) Products of the isoprostane pathway: Unique bioactive compounds and markers of lipid peroxidation. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 59: 808-820. 4. Cappellano G, Carecchio M, Fleetwood T, Magistrelli L, Cantello R, et al. (2013) Immunity and inflammation in neurodegenerative diseases. Am J Neurodegener Dis 2: 89-107. 5. Almer G, Teismann P, Stevic Z, Halaschek-Wiener J, Deecke L, et al. (2002) Increased levels of the pro-inflammatory prostaglandin PGE2 in CSF from ALS patients. Neurology 58: 1277-1279. 6. Farooqui T, Farooqui AA (2011) Lipid-mediated oxidative stress and inflammation in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Parkinson’s Disease 2011: 247467. 7. Guest J, Grant R, Mori TA, Croft KD (2014) Changes in oxidative damage, inflammation and [NAD(H)] with age in cerebrospinal fluid. PLoS One 9: e85335. 8. Roberts II LJ, Milne GL (2009) Isoprostanes. Journal of Lipid Research 50: 219-223. 9. Mattsson N, Haghighi S, Andersen O, Yao Y, Rosengren L, et al. (2007) Elevated cerebrospinal fluid F2-isoprostane levels indicating oxidative stress in healthy siblings of multiple sclerosis patients. Neurosci Lett 414: 233-236. 10. Minghetti L, Greco A, Cardone F, Puopolo M, Ladogana A, et al. (2000) Increased brain synthesis of prostaglandin E2 and F2-isoprostane in human and experimental transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 59: 866-871. 11. Montine TJ, Quinn JF, Milatovic D, Silbert LC, Dang T, et al. (2002) Peripheral F2-isoprostanes and F4-neuroprostanes are not increased in Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 52: 175-179. 29. Hardy KD, Cox BE, Milne GL, Yin H, Roberts LJ II (2011) Nonenzymatic free radical-catalyzed generation of 15-deoxy-?12,14 J2-like compounds (deoxyJ2-isoprostanes) in vivo. J Lipid Res 52: 113-124. 30. Murphy RC, Fahy E (2010) Isoprostane nomenclature: More suggestions, Prostaglandins Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids 82: 69-70. 31. Harris SG, Padilla J, Koumas L, Ray D, Phipps RP (2002) Prostaglandins as modulators of immunity. Trends Immunol 23: 144-150. 32. Reich EE, Markesbery WR, Roberts LJ II, Swift LL, Morrow JD, et al. (2001) Brain regional quantification of F-ring and D-/E-ring isoprostanes and neuroprostanes in Alzheimer’s disease. Am J Pathology 158: 293-297. 33. Streck EL, Czapski GA, Gonc C, da Silva A (2013) Neurodegeneration, mitochondrial dysfunction, and oxidative stress. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2013: 826046. 34. Chen Y, Morrow JD, Roberts LJ II (1999) Formation of reactive cyclopentenone compounds in vivo as products of the isoprostane pathway. J Biol Chem 274: 10863-10868. 35. Chen Y, Zackert WE, Roberts LJ II, Morrow JD (1999) Evidence for the formation of a novel cyclopentenone isoprostane, 15-A(2t)-isoprostane (8-isoprostaglandin A2) in vivo. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta: Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids 1436: 550-556. 36. O’Brien RD (2009) Fats and oils analysis, in Fats and Oils: Formulating and Processing for Applications. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla, USA. pp: 197-260. 12. Yao Y, Zhukareva V, Sung S, Clark CM, Rokach J, et al. (2003) Enhanced brain levels of 8,12-iso-iPF2??-VI differentiate AD from frontotemporal dementia. Neurol 61: 475-478. 37. de Felice C, Signorini C, Durand T, Oger C, Guy A, et al. (2011) F2-dihomoisoprostanes as potential early biomarkers of lipid oxidative damage in Rett syndrome. J Lipid Res 52: 2297. 13. Praticò D, MY Lee V, Trojanowski JQ, Rokach J, Fitzgerald GA (1998) Increased F2-isoprostanes in Alzheimer’s disease: Evidence for enhanced lipid peroxidation in vivo. FASEB J 12: 1777-1783. 38. Barden AE, Corcoran TB, Mas E (2012) Is there a role for isofurans and neuroprostanes in pre-eclampsia and normal pregnancy? Antioxid Redox Signal 16: 165-169. 14. Browne SE, Beal MF (2006) Oxidative damage in Huntington’s disease pathogenesis. Antioxid Redox Signal 8: 2061-2073. 39. Brooks JD, Milne GL, Yin H, Sanchez SC, Porter NA, et al. (2008) Formation of highly reactive cyclopentenone isoprostane compounds (A 3/J3-isoprostanes) in vivo from eicosapentaenoic acid. J Biol Chem 283: 12043-12055. 15. Kralovicova S, Fontaine SN, Alderton A, Brown D (2009) The effects of prion protein expression on metal metabolism. Mol Cellular Neurosci 41: 135-147. 16. Wong BS, Pan T, Liu T, Sy MS (2000) Prion disease: A loss of antioxidant function? Biochem Biophys Res Commun 275: 249-252. 40. Comporti M, Signorini C, Arezzini B, Vecchio D, Monaco B, et al. (2008) F2isoprostanes are not just markers of oxidative stress. Free Radic Biol Med 44: 247-256. 17. Minghetti L, Cardone F, Greco A, Pocchiari M (2002) Increased CSF levels of prostaglandin E2 in variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Neurol 58: 127-129. 41. Zaja-Milatovic S, Gupta RC, Aschner M, Milatovic D (2009) Protection of DFPinduced oxidative damage and neurodegeneration by antioxidants and NMDA receptor antagonist. Toxicol App Pharmacol 240: 124-131. 18. Arlt S, Kontush A, Zerr I, Buhmann C, Jacobi C, et al. (2002) Increased lipid peroxidation in cerebrospinal fluid and plasma from patients with creutzfeldtjakob disease. Neurobiol Dis 10: 150-156. 42. Milatovic D, Montine TJ, Aschner M (2011) Measurement of isoprostanes as markers of oxidative stress. Methods Mol Biol 758: 195-204. 19. Mitsumoto H, Santella RM, Liu X, Bogdanov M, Zipprich J, et al. (2008) Oxidative stress biomarkers in sporadic ALS. Amyotroph Lateral Scler 9: 177-183. Biochem Pharmacol, an open access journal ISSN:2167-0501 43. Amico ED, Factor-Litvak P, Santella RM, Mitsumoto H (2013) Clinical perspective on oxidative stress in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Free Radic Biol Med 65: 509-527. Volume 7 • Issue 2 • 1000246 Citation: Jadoon S, Malik A (2018) A Comprehensive Review Article on Isoprostanes as Biological Markers. Biochem Pharmacol (Los Angel) 7: 246. doi: 10.4172/2167-0501.1000246 Page 8 of 8 44. Wong-Ekkabut J, Xu Z, Triampo W, Tang IM, Tieleman DP, et al. (2007) Effect of lipid peroxidation on the properties of lipid bilayers: A molecular dynamics study. Biophys J 93: 4225-4236. Biochem Pharmacol, an open access journal ISSN:2167-0501 45. Yehuda S, Rabinovitz S, Carasso RL, Mostofsky DI (2002) The role of polyunsaturated fatty acids in restoring the aging neuronal membrane. Neurobiology of Aging 23: 843-853. Volume 7 • Issue 2 • 1000246.[Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Research in Pharmaceutical Sciences, August 2020; 15(4): 367-380 Received: 29-10-2019 Peer Reviewed: 17-02-2020 Revised: 28-04-2020 Accepted: 20-08-2020 Published: 28-08-2020 School of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences Isfahan University of Medical Sciences Original Article Anti-Toxoplasma gondii activity of 5-oxo-hexahydroquinoline derivatives: synthesis, in vitro and in vivo evaluations, and molecular docking analysis Mohammadsaeid Zahedi1, Qasem Asgari2, Fatemeh Badakhshan2, Amirhossein Sakhteman1, Sara Ranjbar3, and Mehdi Khoshneviszadeh1,4,* 1 Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, I.R. Iran. Department of Parasitology and Mycology, School of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, I.R. Iran. 3 Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, I.R. Iran. 4 Medicinal and Natural Products Chemistry Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, I.R. Iran. 2 Abstract Background and purpose: The aim of this study was to evaluate the in vitro and in vivo anti-Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii) effect of 5-oxo-hexahydroquinoline compounds. Moreover, molecular docking study of the compounds into the active site of enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductase (ENR) as a necessary enzyme for the vitality of apicoplast was carried out. Experimental approach: A number of 5-oxo-hexahydoquinoline derivatives (Z1-Z4) were synthesized. The T. gondii tachyzoites of RH strain were treated by different concentrations (1-64 µg/mL) of the compounds. The viability of the encountered parasites with compounds was assessed using flow cytometry and propidium iodide (PI) staining. Due to the high mortality effect of Z3 and Z4 in vitro, their chemotherapy effect was assessed by inoculation of tachyzoites to four BALB/c mice groups (n = 5), followed by the gavage of various concentrations of the compounds to the mice. Molecular docking was done to study the binding affinity of the synthesized 5-oxo-hexahydroquinolines into ENR enzyme active site byusing AutoDock Vina® software. Docking was performed by a Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm with 100 runs. Findings / Results: Flow cytometry assay results indicated compounds Z3 and Z4 had relevant mortality effect on parasite tachyzoites. Besides, in vivo experiments were also performed and a partial increase of mice longevity between control and experiment groups was recorded. Molecular docking of Z3 and Z4 in the binding site of ENR enzyme indicated that the compounds were well accommodated within the binding site. Therefore, it could be suggested that these compounds may exert their anti-T. gondii activity through the inhibition of the ENR enzyme. Conclusion and implications: Compounds Z3 and Z4 are good leads in order to develop better anti-T. gondii agents as they demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo inhibitory effects on tachyzoites viability and infection. Further studies on altering the route of administration along with additional pharmacokinetics evaluations are needed to improve the anti-T. gondii impacts of 5-oxo-hexahydroquinoline compounds. Keywords: Flow cytometry; Molecular docking; 5-Oxo-hexahydroquinoline; Propidium iodide; Toxoplasma. INTRODUCTION Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii) is an intracellular protozoan parasite which causes toxoplasmosis, a common zoonotic infection in humans and animals (1). The estimation indicates that disease prevalence rate in humans is one-third of the world population people who *Corresponding author: M. Khoshneviszadeh Tel: +98-7112332225, Fax: +98-7112424128 Email: khoshnevizm@sums.ac.ir have been chronically infected. The parasite engenders severe medical complications in the fetus and also immunocompromised people (2, 3). Access this article online Website: http://rps.mui.ac.ir DOI: 10.4103/1735-5362.293515 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Zahedi et al. / RPS 2020; 15(4): 367-380 Moreover, despite of the relatively low rate of toxoplasmosis outbreak in immunocompetent ones, some studies report severe toxoplasmosis in healthy patients (4, 5). T. gondii is transmitted by felids, whereas their coccidian lifestyle through sexual reproduction leads to pouring oocysts in outside of their bodies (6-8). Rodents and other intermediate hosts may ingest oocysts, bringing about the initial expansion of growing tachyzoites and thus disseminating to all over the body which leads to acute infection of the parasite. In response to tachyzoites attack throughout the body, the immune reaction of the intermediate host's body occurs, and then parasite converts into the recumbent and slow-growing form of the parasite called the bradyzoite (9). Finally, the ingestion of raw meats or water involving oocysts causes infection in humans. The conventional treatment of toxoplasmosis in humans comprises of a combination of drugs of sulfadiazine (blocks dihydropteroate synthetase) and pyrimethamine (or trimethoprime which inhibits dihydrofolate reductase) (10). T. gondii first disseminates as tachyzoites then resides in tissue cysts causing a prolonged latent infection. In immunocompromised patients, bradyzoites can turn into tachyzoites that may cause pneumonia and encephalitis. Despite all advancements in drug discovery, encysted bradyzoites have not been yet destroyed by suitable drugs (11). Quinolines are a group of heterocyclic aromatic organic compounds with a multitude of medicinal properties (12-15). Quinoline ring and one of its derivatives, 2-methyl-3carbethoxyquinoline, were eligible to inhibit the T. gondii growth, 52-57% loss of a unique non-photosynthetic organelle of T. gondii tachyzoites called apicoplast (16). The synthesis of heme, isoprenoid precursors and fatty-acid synthesis (FAS) II pathway is done within this particular organelle(17,18). The enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductase (ENR) is among the specific enzymes FAS II pathway, the final and integral stage in the fatty acid chain elongation (17). Attempts have far revealed the vulnerability of a host of T. gondii to inhibition of fatty acids pathway and ENR subsequently by triclosan (19,20). As to compare with previous studies, quinoline derived drugs such as 4-aminoquinolines and 8-amino quinolines were more efficacious in treating malaria disease than revealing inhibition effect on T. gondii growth. On the other hand, benzylquine and bisquinoline were among the promising compounds against T. gondii with EC50 values less than 1 µM, in comparison with other candidates that have been used in the study which killed less T. gondii (21). Another research showed that endochin-like quinolone can reduce brain T. gondii tissue cyst numbers in mice due to inhibition of T. gondii cytochrome bc1 function (22). A review study reveals that the quinoline ring has anti-T. gondii activity through mechanisms of heme polymerization and degradation in the food vacuole, membrane transport interruption in the parasite (19), can disrupt apicoplast DNA and finally the whole apicoplast in the parasite (16,23). Regarding quinoline derivatives biological effects, we synthesized 5-oxohexahydroquinoline analogs bearing different aromatic substitutions at C4 while, having different pyridyl alkyl carboxylates at C3 (Fig. 1) and evaluated them for their in vitro and in vivo inhibitory effects on the viability and infectivity of Toxoplasma tachyzoites. Fig. 1. Structural formula of 5-oxo-hexahydroquinoline compounds (pyridin-3-yl methyl 4-(4-bromophenyl)-2methyl- 5- oxo-1,4,5,6,7,8- hexahydroquinoline-3carboxylate (Z1), pyridin-3-yl methyl 4-(3hydroxyhenyl) -2- methyl- 5- oxo -1,4,5,6,7,8hexahydroquinoline-3-carboxylate (Z2), 3-(pyridin-3yl)propyl 4-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2-methyl-5-oxo1,4,5,6,7,8-hexahydroquinoline-3-carboxylate (Z3), and pyridin2-ylmethyl 2-methyl -5-oxo-4-(3,4,5trimethoxyphenyl) -1,4,5,6,7,8-hexahydroquinoline-3carboxylate (Z4). 368 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Anti-Toxoplasma gondii activity of 5-oxohexahydroquinolines Alternatively, 5-oxo-hexahydroquinoline derivatives were obtained by the reaction among oxobutanoate (2a, 2b, or 2c), corresponding aromatic aldehyde (2 mmol) and 1,3-cyclohexanedione (2 mmol) in the presence of ammonium acetate (10 mmol) in ethanol (7 mL) for 8 h, while protected from light (Fig. 2) (15). The reaction was monitored by thin-layer chromatography (TLC). Ethanol was removed under reduced pressure and the residue was dissolved in chloroform. Then the reaction mixture was purified by TLC with chloroform-ethanol as the mobile phase. Finally, the product was recrystallized from the proper solvent to yield pure compounds (Fig. 2). All the molecular structures of final products were classified and confirmed by IR, 1H NMR, mass spectrometry (MS), and elemental analysis. Chemical structures and physical properties of the synthesized compounds are shown in Table 1. MATERIALS AND METHODS Chemicals Analytical degree chemicals and solvents were used in this experiment. Pyridine-2-ylmethanol, pyridine-3-yl-methanol, pyridine-3ylpropanol, aldehydes, and 1,3cyclohexanedione were provided from Merck, Darmstadt, Germany. Propidium iodide (PI) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, USA. Apparatuses Carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance 13 ( C NMR) and proton (1H) NMR spectra were detected with a Brucker 300 spectrometer. Infrared (IR) spectra were acquired on a PerkinElmer spectrometer (KBr disk) (Perkin-Elmer, Waltham, MA). Chemical shifts were reported as ppm and tetramethylsilane was used as an internal standard. Mass spectra (MS) were recorded with an Agilent spectrometer (Agilent technologies 9575c inert MSD, USA). A Costech elemental analysis instrument (Costech ESC 4010, Italy) was achieved as the elemental assessment and was within 0.4 % of the calculated value. A hot stage apparatus (Electrothermal, Essex, UK) was used to attain melting points. Biological activity procedures Animals Inbred BALB/c mice aging 6-8 weeks, and weighing 25-27 g were purchased from Pasteur Institute, Tehran, I.R. Iran. The whole procedures of trials and sacrifices were identical for all animals. In the course of the experiments, starting from November 2017 and ending up to February 2018, animals were maintained at 22 °C with about 40-50% relative humidity, and also standard food and water ad libitum were available. The in vivo study was conducted based on the laboratory animal’s guidelines in literary and research disciplines (24). Synthesis of 5-oxo-hexahydroquinoline derivatives (Z1-Z4) Oxobutanoates (2a, 2b, and 2c) were synthesized by reacting pyridin-3-ylmethanol (1a), pyridin-2-ylmethanol (1b) or pyridin-3ylpropanol (1c) with 2, 2, 6-trimethyl-4H-1, 3dioxin-4-one in high yields as shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 2. Synthetic approaches of compounds Z1-Z4. 369 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Zahedi et al. / RPS 2020; 15(4): 367-380 Table 1. Structures and drug likeness scores of synthesized compounds. Code R1 Z1 R2 Yield (%) Log P HBA HBD TPSA nRB MW 3-methylpyridine 43 2.048 5 1 67.76 6 453 Z2 3-methylpyridine 24 1.214 6 2 87.99 5 390 Z3 2-methylpyridine 68 2.173 8 1 95.45 8 464 Z4 3-propylpyridine 48 2.051 6 1 64.98 6 432 LogP, Logarithm of partition coefficient between n-octanol and water; HBA, number of hydrogen bond acceptors; HBD, number of hydrogen bond donors; TPSA, topological polar surface area; nRB, number of rotatable bonds; MW, molecular weight. Parasites The virulent T. gondii RH strain was provided from Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, I.R. Iran. T. gondii Tachyzoites were taken by a serial intraperitoneal passage in BALB/c inbred mice and then they were collected 72 h after the inoculation of 106 parasites in the mice, by repeated flushing in the peritoneal cavity using phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at a pH of 7.2. Next, tachyzoites were harvested and centrifuged for 10 min at 200 g at 25 °C to eliminate the peritoneal cells and cellular debris. The supernatant was then gathered and centrifuged for 10 min at 1200 rpm (800 g) (25). at 4 °C. Then, the tachyzoites were gathered in Eppendorf tubes staining with 50 µg/mL concentration of PI for 30 min at 4 °C. Finally, the parasites were preserved on ice and in dark condition until analysis. Positive controls were obtained by incubation of the parasites in the vicinity of 0.2% saponin. The cell suspension was transferred into polystyrene flow cytometry tubes (BD Falcon, USA). Data achievement and evaluation were performed with a FACS Calibur flow cytometer (BectonDickinson, San Jose, USA) and Cell Quest Pro software (25). Chemotherapy effect of the compounds A number of 2 × 105 tachyzoites were subcutaneously inoculated into 5 groups, 5 mices in each group, including three concentrations (16, 32, 64 µg/mL) of compounds Z3, Z4.The other groups were negative and positive control (Sufadiazine 4 µg/mL). Based on IC50 determination study of compounds Z3, Z4, these compounds were Extracellular viability assay (flow cytometry) Compounds Z1-Z4 were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to attain a 10 mM stock solution. The tachyzoites (2 × 105/mL of PBS) were treated with DMSO (0.1% v/v) as the control and various concentrations (1-64 µg/mL) of 5-oxo-hexahydroquinolines for 2 h 370 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Anti-Toxoplasma gondii activity of 5-oxohexahydroquinolines selected for chemotherapy in mice. Toxicity assessment of compounds Z3 and Z4 was performed in the 6th group of mice; the compounds were orally gavaged into mice that have not been inoculated by the intact parasites. For the negative control, the mice only have been inoculated with parasites. Sulfadiazine (15 mg/kg) as an active substance was orally administered against T. gondii in the positive control group. resulting from docking was ranked due to the free energy of the interactions of ligandreceptors. Validation of molecular docking was done by extracting the structure of the cocrystallized ligand and re-docking it into the receptor (self-docking). The root mean square deviation (RMSD) was used to evaluate, optimize, and validate the docking calculations. We investigated the binding affinities of the synthesized 5-oxo-hexahydroquinolines into ENR enzyme active site. The docking process used a Lamarckian genetic algorithm with 100 runs for each ligand, leaving other parameters at their default measures (28). Conformations were clustered and ranked by the energy. The conformation with the best-scored pose and the lowest binding energy was selected. The docking results were depicted using ChemOffice® software. Molecular docking analysis The 3D structures of the synthesized compounds were sketched using ChemOffice software (26) Then, the achieved structures were optimized in their conformation by the energy minimization process, in which the results were saved in pdb formats. After energy optimization and ligand preparation, the Gastiger’s partial charges and the number of torque’s angles of molecules were calculated. The ligands were also saved in pdbqt formats. In this study, we applied AutoDock Vina software to inquire about the affinity and binding modes of the synthesized derivatives to the binding pocket of P-gp. X-ray crystal structure of Enoyl-acyl Carrier Protein Reductase (Enoyl ACP Reductase) in complex with triclosan and NAD (PDB ID: 2O2S) was got from RCSB Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org). To prepare the enzyme for docking, we removed the innate ligand and water molecules, added hydrogen atoms, merged non-polar hydrogens, and added Gasteiger charges. All rotatable bonds of ligands, defined by default of the program, were allowed to rotate during the automated docking process, and then prepared protein and ligand structures were saved in the PDBQT format suitable for calculating energy grid maps. Auto Dock Tools were used to prepare the molecules and parameters before submitting it for docking analysis with Auto Dock (27). The grid dimensions were 30 × 30 × 30 Å along with a grid space value of 1 Å. The grid was centered at 3.177, 67.997, and 67.535 Å (X, Y, and Z) which involved the active site of triclosan. It is notable to say that macromolecule sequences were considered rigid and inflexible. Besides, the exhaustiveness factor was considered “8”, and then each of the conformational structures Statistical analysis Data analysis was done by FACS Calibur flow, Cell Quest Pro software and SPSS software (version 22, Armonk, NY, USA) using the one way ANOVA test as appropriate. Intergroup comparisons were undertaken using Tukey’s posthoc test, after log transformation for nonparametrically distributed variables. ?? = 0.05 was contemplated statistically significant. RESULTS Synthesis of 5-oxo-hexahydroquinoline derivatives The designed compounds were synthesized through conventional synthetic procedures and characterized by different methods. Pyridin-3-yl methyl 4-(4-bromophenyl)-2methyl-5-oxo-1,4,5,6,7,8-hexahydroquinoline3-carboxylate (Z1) Recrystallized from ethanol; pale 1 yellow crystals; M.P: 233 °C. H NMR (DMSO-d6, 300 MHz) dH (ppm): 1.72-1.91 (m, 2H, cyclohexenone), 2.14-2.21 (m, 2H, cyclohexenone), 2.30 (s, 3H, dihexadecylphosphate (DHP)-CH3), 2.44-2.50 (m, 2H, cyclohexenone overlapped with DMSO), 4.87 (s, 1H, DHP-C4-H), 5.02 and 5.10 (AB system, 2H, JAB = 12.6 Hz, COOCH2), 7.05 (d, 2H, J = 8.4 Hz, phenyl-H-2, 6), 7.29371 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Zahedi et al. / RPS 2020; 15(4): 367-380 7.35 (m, 3H, pyridine-H-5 and phenyl-H-3, 5), 7.53 (dt, 1H, J = 7.8, 1.8 Hz, pyridine-H-4), 8.45 (d, 1H, J = 1.8 Hz, pyridine-H-2), 8.50 (dd, 1H, J = 4.8, 1.5 Hz, pyridine-H-6), 9.28 (brs, 1H, NH). 13C NMR (DMSO-d6, 75 MHz) dH (ppm): 18.78, 21.16, 26.45, 35.88, 37.08, 63.02, 102.62, 111.37, 119.26, 123.87, 130.17, 131.17, 132.69, 136.10, 146.88, 147.39, 149.48, 149.56, 151.73, 166.82, 195.19. MS (EI), m/z (%): 452 (M+, 3), 362 (18), 361 (3), 360 (20), 297 (100), 237 (3), 205 (5), 180, 161 (7), 133 (4), 92 (11), 65 (5). IR (KBr): ? 3207 (NH), 3079 (CH-aromatic), 2952 (CHaliphatic), 1667, 1634 cm-1 (CO). Found C, 70.21; H, 4.68; N, 6.16%. Anal. (C23H21BrN2O3) requires C, 60.94; H, 4.67; N, 6.18%. and COOCH2CH2CH2), 3.55 (s, 3H, phenylOCH3), 3.78-3.98 (2m, 2H, COOCH2CH2CH2), 4.94 (s, 1H, DHP-C4-H), 6.60 (d, 2H, J = 9 Hz, phenyl-H-3,5), 7.10 (d, 3H, J = 9 Hz, phenylH-2,6 and pyridine-H-5 ), 7.34 (d, 1H, J = 7.8 Hz, pyridine-H-4), 8.06 (brs, 1H, NH), 8.21 (s, 1H, pyridine-H-2), 8.25 (d, 1H, J = 0.6 Hz, pyridine-H-6). MS (EI) m/z (%): 432 (M+, 45), 414 (59), 325 (100), 312 (27), 294 (9), 268 (18), 206 (27), 161 (7), 120 (21), 92 (36). IR (KBr): ? 3279 (NH), 3074 (CH-aromatic), 2952 (CHaliphatic), 1694, 1646 cm-1 (COC). Anal. Calcd for C25H26N2O4: C 72.35, H 6.50, N 6.49%, found: C 72.20, H 6.53, N 6.48%. Pyridin-2-ylmethyl 2-methyl-5-oxo-4-(3,4,5trimethoxyphenyl)-1,4,5,6,7,8hexahydroquinoline-3-carboxylate (Z4) Recystallized from ethyl acetate; pale yellow crystals, M.P: 174 °C. 1H NMR (DMSO-d6, 300 MHz) dH (ppm): 1.77-194 (m, 2H, cyclohexenone), 2.21-2.25 (m, 2H, cyclohexenone), 2.32 (s, 3H, DHP-CH3), 2.462.50 (m, 2H, cyclohexenone, overlapped with DMSO), 3.59 (s, 3H, phenyl-4-OCH3), 3.61 (s, 6H, phenyl-3,5-OCH3), 4.95 (s, 1H, DHP-C4H), 5.10 and 5.18 (AB system, 2H, JAB = 13.8 Hz, COOCH2), 6.42 (s, 2H, phenyl-H-2,6), 7.07 (d, 1H, J = 8.1 Hz, pyridine-H-3), 7.28-7.32 (m, 1H, pyridine-H-5), 7.67-7.72 (m, 1H, pyridineH-4), 8.51-8.53 (d, 1H, J = 4.5 Hz, pyridine-H6), 9.12 (brs, 1H, NH). MS (EI), m/z (%): 464 (M+, 2), 433 (4), 372 (100), 328 (11), 297 (36), 188 (35), 160 (13), 133 (4), 93 (14), 65 (5). IR (KBr): ? 3276 (NH), 3073 (CH-aromatic), 2935 (CH-aliphatic), 1702, 1647 (CO), 1070, 1230 cm-1 (COC). Found C, 67.42; H, 6.05; N, 6.00%. Anal. (C26H28N2O6) requires C, 67.23; H, 6.08; N, 6.03%. Pyridin-3-yl methyl 4-(3-hydroxyhenyl)-2methyl-5-oxo-1,4,5,6,7,8-hexahydroquinoline3-carboxylate (Z2) Recrystallized from ethyl acetate and ethanol; pale yellow crystals; M.P: 214 °C. 1H NMR (DMSO-d6, 300 MHz) dH (ppm): 1.661.93 (m, 2H, cyclohexenone), 2.18-2.20 (m, 2H, cyclohexenone) 2.30 (s, 3H, DHP-CH3), 2.44-2.50 (m, 2H, cyclohexenone, overlapped with DMSO), 4.87 (s, 1H, DHP-C4-H), 5.04 and 5.12 (AB system, 2H, JAB = 12.9 Hz, COOCH2), 6.46-6.49 (m, 1H, phenyl-H-4), 6.54-6.57 (m, 2H, phenyl-H-2,6), 6.93 (t, 1H, J = 7.5 Hz, phenyl-H-5), 7.29-7.34 (m, 1H, pyridine-H-5), 7.53 (dt, 1H, J = 7.8, 1.5 Hz, pyridine-H-4), 8.46 (d, 1H, J = 1.5 Hz, pyridine-H-2), 8.49 (dd, 1H, J = 4.8, 1.5 Hz, pyridine-H-6), 9.13 (brs, 1H, NH), 9.21 (brs, 1H, OH). MS (EI), m/z (%): 390 (M+, 11), 312 (14), 297 (100), 254 (4), 216 (4), 161 (7), 133 (4), 93 (18). IR (KBr): ? 3276 (NH), 3072 (CHaromatic), 2938 (CH-aliphatic), 1699, 1645 cm1 (CO). Found C, 70.57; H, 5.64; N, 7.19%. Anal. (C23H22N2O4) requires C, 70.75; H, 5.68; N, 7.17%. Biological section Flow cytometric determination of T. gondii tachyzoite mortality evaluation in the presense of 5-oxo-hexahydroquinolines The synthesized and purified 5-oxohexahydroquinolines (Z1-Z4) were evaluated for their effect on T. gondii tachyzoite mortality using flow cytometric determination of PI. Flow cytometry analysis of different concentrations (1-64 µg/mL) of the compounds against T. gondii tachyzoites viability is demonstrated in Fig. 3. 3-(pyridin-3-yl)propyl 4-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2methyl-5-oxo-1,4,5,6,7,8-hexahydroquinoline3-carboxylate (Z3) Recrystallized from ethanol; pale yellow crystals; M.P: 165 °C. 1H NMR (acetone, 300 MHz) dH (ppm): 1.62-1.77 (m, 4H, cyclohexenone and COOCH2CH2CH2), 2.072.10 (m, 2H, cyclohexanone), 2.27 (s, 3H, DHP-CH3), 2.36-2.43 (m, 4H, cyclohexenone, 372 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Anti-Toxoplasma gondii activity of 5-oxohexahydroquinolines 373 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Zahedi et al. / RPS 2020; 15(4): 367-380 Fig. 3. Flow cytometry analysis of Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites exposed to different concentrations of Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4, negative and positive controls. Compounds Z3 and Z4 caused over 50% mortality of tachyzoites at high concentrations (8-64 µg/mL). The test results on tachyzoite of T. gondii exposed to DMSO, saponin as a positive control, and various doses of Z1-Z4 are shown in Table 2. The percentages of mortality 374 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Anti-Toxoplasma gondii activity of 5-oxohexahydroquinolines 64 µg/mL). Results revealed that after about 10 days all the mice died and the mean longevity of the mice treated with 16, 32 and 64 µg/mL of Z3 was 7, 8.5 and 8.6 days and for Z4 were 7.8, 9.1 and 9.6, respectively, while, the mean survival of the mice in the negative control group was 5.4 days (Fig. 4). The results showed a correlation between Z3 and Z4 administration and the mice resistance against T. gondii tachyzoites. It seems that increasing the administered doses of Z3 and Z4, leads to higher mice longevity. caused by the compounds improved in a concentration-dependent manner. Saponin (0.2%) was used to trigger mortality or apoptosis which was seen about 96.69% of the exposing tachyzoites. in vivo anti-T. gondii activity of 5-oxohexahydroquinolines The most active compounds, Z3 and Z4, were evaluated for their in vivo anti-T. gondii activity in the mice exposed to the tachyzoites in three different concentrations (16, 32, Table 2. The mortality (%) of Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites after 1.5 h exposure to different concentrations of 5-oxohexahydroquinoline derivatives. 0.2% of saponin was used as the positive control, in the meantime, DMSO (0.1% v/v) was considered as the negative control. Concentrations (µg/mL) 0 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 Compounds Z1 0.41 20.06 21.48 13.27 26.46 33.52 38.86 35.21 - Z2 0.41 20.30 21.49 14.22 24.51 26.92 38.20 42.43 - Z3 0.41 77.94 73.03 72.14 63.70 64.94 74.56 78.03 - Controls Z4 0.41 76.68 75.59 85.47 85.77 83.93 90.28 90.57 - DMSO 16.32 Saponin 96.69 Fig. 4. The mean of longevity (days) of mice groups inoculated by Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites exposed to three different concentrations of compounds Z3 and Z4 (µg/mL). *P = 0.05 indicates significant differences compared to the negative control group (DMSO). The mice treated with sulfadiazine as positive control but due to a longevity more than 30 days, therefore the positive control is not shown on the graph. Data represent mean ± SD, n = 5. listed in Table 3. Molecular docking process was validated by extracting the structure of the co-crystallized ligand and redocking it into the receptor (self-docking). Molecular docking analysis We investigated the binding affinities of the synthesized 5-oxo-hexahydroquinolines into ENR enzyme active site. Docking results are 375 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Zahedi et al. / RPS 2020; 15(4): 367-380 Table 3. Docking results of 5-oxo-hexahydroquinoline derivatives into the Toxoplasma gondii Enoyl- acyl carrier protein Reductase enzyme binding site. Ligands Z1 Z2 ?G (Kcal/mol) -8.4 -7.8 Z3 -8.5 Z4 -9.2 Triclosan -9.1 Interaction H-bonding H-bonding H-bonding H-bonding H-bonding H-bonding H-bonding H-bonding Atom of ligand Oxygen (carbonyl) Oxygen (carbonyl) NH Oxygen (methoxy) NH Nitrogen (pyridine ring) Oxygen (carbonyl) OH Amino acid Gly131 Gly131 Ala129 Lys237 Ala129 Arg230 Ala231 Tyr189 Fig 5. Representation of the co-crystallized inhibitor (blue) docked into the binding site and superimposed on cocrystallized inhibitor (red) in the crystal structure of T. gondii Enoyl-ACP Reductase (PDB ID: 2O2S). Fig. 6. Docking model of compound Z4 in the Toxoplasma gondii enoyl-acyl carrier protein Reductase enzyme active site (PDB ID: 2O2S). 376 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Anti-Toxoplasma gondii activity of 5-oxohexahydroquinolines Endochin-like quinolone structure was also previously surveyed for its potential use in clinics. The relevant results revealed that two of endochin-like derivatives were remarkably successful in the inhibition of acute and latent murine toxoplasmosis. Inhibition of the cytochrome bc1 complex in the parasites was suggested as a reason for this outstanding effect (22). Moreover, the other quinolone that reported to be effective against toxoplasmosis was enrofloxacin, which was better than sulfadiazine (as a strong anti-T. gondii compound) to protect human foreskin fibroblasts infected cells against T. gondii. Enrofloxacin proved to be an active compound for cleaning up the tissue parasites as well as it could alleviate the brain inflammations of T. gondii’s infected Calomys callosus. In addition, the reduction percentage of intracellular replication during the usage of enrofloxacin was more than sulfadiazine (30). Another research that was based on the combination of enrofloxacin and toltrazuril, resulted killing a significant number of parasites and entirely broking down the tachyzoite structure (31). Gatifloxacin, as a fluoroquinolone, has ultimately inhibited human foreskin fibroblasts T. gondii intracellular replication, therefore leads to increase the T. gondii's infected mice survival, and it has protected the mice against acute toxoplasmosis. As like as enrofloxacin, a synergistic effect, in vitro and in vivo, was observed by using gatifloxacin along with pyrimethamine. Moreover, juxtaposing infected mice associated with concurrent use of gatifloxacin and interferon gamma demonstrates appropriate effect of the drugs which was much higher than using them separated (32). In vivo study of several quinolone derivatives against acute and latent toxoplasmosis showed that two of the compounds had ED50 values of 0.14 and 0.08 mg/kg in comparison with atovaquone having an ED50 value of 0.85 mg/kg (22). In our study, 5-oxo-hexahydroquinoline derivatives were evaluated for their anti-T. gondii effects. Reviewing the literature of quinoline derivatives in the previous studies, two compounds were analyzed and proved to be active agents against T. gondii with EC50 value of 0.03 mg/kg. Furthermore, they had an inhibitory effect on Plasmodium falciparum regarding the mitochondrial electron transport mechanism, a necessary phase of pyrimidines synthesis (33). RMSD between the best conformation of the native ligand docked into the binding site of T. gondii ENR and the experimental one was 0.51 Å (Fig. 5). Binding interactions of the synthesized derivatives established H-bonding and H-Pi interactions with different amino acids including Gly131, Ala231, Asn130, Ala129, Lys237, and Arg230 (Table 3). Compounds Z3 and Z4 possessed the most negative binding free energies (-8.5 and -9.2 kcal/mol) which were comparable to that of the innate ligand (-9.1 kcal/mol), were well accumulated in the binding pocket of ENR by making hydrogen bonds. The binding model of Z3 and Z4 is illustrated in Fig. 6. In the two active compounds (Z3 and Z4) a key hydrogen bond interaction could be seen between NH of the hexahydroquinolinone ring and Ala129. It seems that the residue Ala129 played a crucial role in making stable ligand-protein complexes. DISCUSSION 5-Oxo-hexahydroquinoline compounds synthesis and evaluation were done to assess their anti-T. gondii effects. Flow cytometry results using PI staining on T. gondii extracellular tachyzoites indicated that compound Z3 (baering 2-pyridyl methyl carboxylate and 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl at C3 and C4) and Z4 (containing 23-pyridyl propyl carboxylate and 4-methoxyphenyl moiety at C3 and C4) are potential substances to exert antiT. gondii effects. Treating toxoplasmosis has some difficulties, such as adverse effects of currently available drugs, which could be resolved by looking for novel compounds with new effective mechanisms. One other major problem to address is the treatment of immunocompromised patients, which can be complicated due to their latent period. Furthermore, rising microbial resistance is also very challenging; therefore, developing new effective drugs that are devoid of previous problems are of great importance. A number of studies were conducted on quinolone derivatives evaluation. By way of example, an study showed that 1-hydroxyquinolones inhibited the growth of T. gondii by means of pyrimidine starvation associated with the ATP depletion in dihydroorotate dehydrogenase pathway (29). 377 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Zahedi et al. / RPS 2020; 15(4): 367-380 4-Aminoquinoline and 8-aminoquinoline derivatives such as tafenoquine were safer than primaquine, they are utilizing to prevent the relapse of Plasmodium vivax as well, but these compounds were ineffective against T. gondii eventually (34). Another study that was conducted on the effects of quinolone-like compounds on T. gondii indicated that quinolone has less EC50 than atovaquone, at the same time, the quinolone-like compounds were among the ones with higher EC50 amounts than other common drugs in toxoplasmosis treatment (21). A survey on the effect of 8-hydroxyquinoline compounds as anti-T. gondii agents showed that 58 derivatives of these compounds containing one or two quinoline rings had very high effects (16). In the present study, the most active compounds (Z3 and Z4) were evaluated for their anti-T. gondii activity in mice at three different concentrations. in vivo results showed significant statistical differences between all doses of both compounds and the negative control group (P = 0.05) except the compound Z3 at 16 µg/mL, the mean longevity was increased compared to the negative control group. Besides, toxicity effects were also analyzed, and the mice which were administered the highest dose (64 µg/mL) of compound Z3 and Z4 showed no signs of a certain amount of toxicity (weight loss, ruffled fur, inactivity and so forth). Biologically, T. gondii and the other Apicomplexa family parasites have an essential organelle for parasite living which is called apicoplast. FAS pathway is of utmost importance mechanism in the apicoplast. The FAS process in mammalians is type I, but in Apicomplexa parasites is type II. The fatty acid production in microorganisms is well studied, it helped scientists to discover relevant enzymes and substrates. Review studies show the key role of FAS II pathway inhibition in pathogen mortality (35,36). FAS comprised of 4 stages of compression, reduction, hydration, and elongation, respectively. Elongation is the most important stage of the process that is catalyzed by ENR (37). ENR reduces the double bond between acetyl CoA and malonyl CoA in associated with NADH cofactor. Studies demonstrated that ENR is of great necessity for FAS (38,39). Drugs such as isoniazid, triclosan, diaborazine derivatives, and aminopyridine inhibitors are able to inhibit this enzyme in bacteria, triclosan certainly inhibits FAS in both T. gondii and Plasmodium falciparum (18,39). As previously mentioned, the quinolone derivatives were among the antiT. gondii apicoplast agents. Thus, the ENR enzyme within the apicoplast of the parasite provided us a chance to assess the hexahydroquinoline based compounds inhibition effect on the FAS process (23). These results propose using hexahydroquinoline derivatives with a similar structure to quinolone might exert anti-T. gondii effects. Back to our study, docking results of the 5-oxohexahydroquinolines showed that compound Z3 and Z4 was well located within the active site of T. gondii ENR enzyme and possessed the least estimated free energy of binding compared to the innate ligand. In addition, the correlation between biological activities and the binding affinities anticipated by AutoDock Vina® modeling was appropriate for compound Z3 and Z4. Therefore, it is suggested that this compound may exert its anti-T. gondii activity through the inhibition of the ENR enzyme. Several studies surveyed ENR, for instance, in one study isoxazole-3-carboxamides, 4hydroxypyridine-2(1H)-ones, and 3aminopyrazoles were considered the best inhibitors of ENR. However, this is not the only enzyme that should be inhibited and other mechanisms of fatty acid synthesis should be blocked as well to kill tachyzoites (19). The result of infectivity test on tachyzoites indicated that compound Z3 and Z4 prolonged the life duration of mice groups inoculated by Toxoplasma tachyzoites more effectively than negative control group; moreover, considrable statistical differences were observed between the compounds of intrest and the control group. Docking results of the 5-oxohexahydroquinolines exposed that compounds Z4 and Z3 well located within the active site of T. gondii ENR enzyme and possessed the most negative estimated free energies of binding comparable to the innate ligand. In addition, the correlation between biological activities and the binding affinities predicted by AutoDock modeling was highly good for some compounds. Therefore, it could be suggested that these compounds may exert their anti-T. gondii activity through the inhibition of the ENR enzyme. 378 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Anti-Toxoplasma gondii activity of 5-oxohexahydroquinolines 5. Khan A, Ajzenberg D, Mercier A, Demar M, Simon S, Darde ML, et al. Geographic separation of domestic and wild strains of Toxoplasma gondii in French Guiana correlates with a monomorphic version of chromosome1a. PLOS Neglect Trop Dis. 2014;8(9):e3182,1-12. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003182. 6. Freppel W, Ferguson DJ, Shapiro K, Dubey JP, Puech P-H, Dumètre A. Structure, composition, and roles of the Toxoplasma gondii oocyst and sporocyst walls. Cell Surf. 2019;5:100016-100026. DOI: 10.1016/j.tcsw.2018.100016. 7. Dubey JP. The history and life cycle of Toxoplasma gondii. In: Weiss LM, Kim K, editors. The model Apicomplexan-perspectives and methods. 3th ed. New York: Academic Press; 2020. pp. 1-19. DOI: 10.1016/C2011-0-07157-0. 8. Ramakrishnan C, Maier S, Walker RA, Rehrauer H, Joekel DE, Winiger RR, et al. An experimental genetically attenuated live vaccine to prevent transmission of Toxoplasma gondii by cats. Sci Rep. 2019;9(1):1474-1487. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-37671-8. 9. Saraf P, Shwab EK, Dubey JP, Su C. On the determination of Toxoplasma gondii virulence in mice. Exp Parasitol. 2017;174:25-30. DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2017.01.009. 10. Konstantinovic N, Guegan H, Stäjner T, Belaz S, Robert-Gangneux F. Treatment of toxoplasmosis: current options and future perspectives. Food Waterborne Parasitol. 2019;15:e00036,1-15. DOI: 10.1016/j.fawpar.2019.e00036. 11. Murata Y, Sugi T, Weiss LM, Kato K. Identification of compounds that suppress Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites and bradyzoites. PloS One. 2017;12(6):e0178203,1-14. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178203 12. Kumari L, Mazumder A, Pandey D, Yar MS, Kumar R, Mazumder R, et al. Synthesis and biological potentials of quinoline analogues: A review of literature. MiniRev Org Chem. 2019;16:653-88. DOI: 10.2174/1570193X16666190213105146 13. Ranjbar S, Edraki N, Firuzi O, Khoshneviszadeh M, Miri R. 5-Oxo-hexahydroquinoline: An attractive scaffold with diverse biological activities. Mol. Divers. 2019;23:471-508. DOI: 10.1007/s11030-018-9886-4 14. Ranjbar S, Khonkarn R, Moreno A, BaubichonCortay H, Miri R, Khoshneviszadeh M, et al. 5-Oxohexahydroquinoline derivatives as modulators of P-gp, MRP1 and BCRP transporters to overcome multidrug resistance in cancer cells. Toxicol Appl Pharm. 2019;362:136-49. DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2018.10.025 15. Ranjbar S, Firuzi O, Edraki N, Shahraki O, Saso L, Khoshneviszadeh M, et al. Tetrahydroquinolinone derivatives as potent P-glycoprotein inhibitors: design, synthesis, biological evaluation and molecular docking analysis. MedChemComm. 2017;8:1919-33. DOI: 10.1039/C7MD00178A 16. Kadri D, Crater AK, Lee H, Solomon VR, Ananvoranich S. The potential of quinoline derivatives CONCLUSION 5-Oxo-hexahydroquinoline derivatives have been synthesized and evaluated for their anti-T. gondii activities. In conclusion, 5-oxohexahydroquinoline seems to be an attractive scaffold in this field and provides the context of further research for lead optimization and drug discovery. Compounds Z3 (baering 2-pyridyl methyl carboxylate and 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl at C3 and C4) and Z4 (containing 23-pyridyl propyl carboxylate and 4-methoxyphenyl moiety at C3 and C4) are good leads in order to develop better anti-T. gondii agents as they demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo inhibitory effects on tachyzoites viability and infection. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This project was retrieved from Pharm. D. thesis of Mohammadsaeid Zahedi, which was financially supported (Grant No. 95-01-0513026) by the Vice-Chancellor of Research and Technology of Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, I.R. Iran. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST STATMENT All authors declare no conflict of interest in this study. AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTION All authors contributed equally to this study. REFERENCES 1. Dunay IR, Gajurel K, Dhakal R, Liesenfeld O, Montoya JG. Treatment of toxoplasmosis: historical perspective, animal models, and current clinical practice. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2018;31(4):e00057-17,1-33. DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00057-17. 2. Hoffmann S, Batz MB, Morris JG. Annual cost of illness and quality-adjusted life year losses in the United States due to 14 foodborne pathogens. J Food Prot. 2012;75(7):1292-1302. DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-11-417. 3. Weiss LM, Dubey JP. Toxoplasmosis: A history of clinical observations. . Int J Parasitol. 2009;39(8):895-901. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2009.02.004. 4. Carme B, Demar M, Ajzenberg D, Dardé ML. Severe acquired toxoplasmosis caused by wild cycle of Toxoplasma gondii, French Guiana. Emerg Infect Dis. 2009;15(4):656-658. DOI: 10.3201/eid1504.081306. 379 [Downloaded free from http://www.rpsjournal.net on Thursday, September 3, 2020, IP: 117.212.240.236] Zahedi et al. / RPS 2020; 15(4): 367-380 free energy function. J Comput Chem. 1998;19(14):1639-1662. DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1096. 29. Hegewald J, Gross U, Bohne W. Identification of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase as a relevant drug target for 1-hydroxyquinolones in Toxoplasma gondii. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2013;190(1):6-15. DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2013.05.008. 30. Barbosa BF, Gomes AO, Ferro EAV, Napolitano DR, Mineo JR, Silva NM. Enrofloxacin is able to control Toxoplasma gondii infection in both in vitro and in vivo experimental models. Vet Parasitol. 2012;187(1-2):4452. DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.12.039. 31. da Silva RJ, Gomes AO, Franco PS, Pereira AS, Milian IC, Ribeiro M, et al. Enrofloxacin and toltrazuril are able to reduce Toxoplasma gondii growth in human BeWo trophoblastic cells and villous explants from human third trimester pregnancy. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017;7:340-360. DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00340. 32. Khan AA, Slifer TR, Araujo FG, Remington JS. Activity of gatifloxacin alone or in combination with pyrimethamine or gamma interferon against Toxoplasma gondii. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2001;45(1):4851. DOI: 10.1128/AAC.45.1.48-51.2001. 33. McPhillie M, Zhou Y, El Bissati K, Dubey J, Lorenzi H, Capper M, et al. New paradigms for understanding and step changes in treating active and chronic, persistent apicomplexan infections. S Sci Rep. 2016;6:2917929202. DOI: 10.1038/srep29179. 34. Burrows JN, Burlot E, Campo B, Cherbuin S, Jeanneret S, Leroy D, et al. Antimalarial drug discovery– the path towards eradication. Parasitol. 2014;141(1):128139. DOI: 10.1017/S0031182013000826. 35. Parsons JB, Frank MW, Subramanian C, Saenkham P, Rock CO. Metabolic basis for the differential susceptibility of Gram-positive pathogens to fatty acid synthesis inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108(37):15378-15383. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1109208108. 36. Yao J, Rock CO. How bacterial pathogens eat host lipids: implications for the development of fatty acid synthesis therapeutics. J J Biol Chem. 2015;290(10):5940-5946. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.R114.636241. 37. Vaughan AM, O'Neill MT, Tarun AS, Camargo N, Phuong TM, Aly AS, et al. Type II fatty acid synthesis is essential only for malaria parasite late liver stage development. Cell Microbiol. 2009;11(3):506-520. DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01270.x. 38. Goodman C, McFadden G. Fatty acid biosynthesis as a drug target in apicomplexan parasites. Current drug targets. 2007;8:15-30. 39. Surolia N, Surolia A. Triclosan offers protection against blood stages of malaria by inhibiting enoyl-ACP reductase of Plasmodium falciparum. Nat Med. 2001;7(2):167-173. DOI: 10.1038/84612. for the treatment of Toxoplasma gondii infection. Exp Parasitol. 2014;145:135-144. DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2014.08.008. 17. Brinster S, Lamberet G, Staels B, Trieu-Cuot P, Gruss A, Poyart C. Type II fatty acid synthesis is not a suitable antibiotic target for Gram-positive pathogens. Nature. 2009;458(7234):83-86. DOI: 10.1038/nature07772. 18. Salas-Navarrete C, Hernández-Chávez G, Flores N, Martínez LM, Martinez A, Bolívar F, et al. Increasing pinosylvin production in Escherichia coli by reducing the expression level of the gene fabI-encoded enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductase. Electron J Biotechnol. 2018;33:11-16. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejbt.2018.03.001. 19. Anquetin G, Greiner J, Vierling P. Quinolone-based drugs against Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium spp. Curr Drug Targets Infect Disord. 2005;5(3):227-245. DOI: 10.2174/1568005054880172. 20. McLeod R, Muench SP, Rafferty JB, Kyle DE, Mui EJ, Kirisits MJ, et al. Triclosan inhibits the growth of Plasmodium falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii by inhibition of apicomplexan Fab I. Int J Parasitol. 2001;31(2):109-113. DOI: 10.1016/s0020-7519(01)00111-4. 21. Radke JB, Burrows JN, Goldberg DE, Sibley LD. Evaluation of current and emerging antimalarial medicines for inhibition of Toxoplasma gondii growth in vitro. Int J Parasitol. 2001;31(2):109-113. DOI: 10.1016/s0020-7519(01)00111-4. 22. Doggett JS, Nilsen A, Forquer I, Wegmann KW, Jones-Brando L, Yolken RH, et al. Endochin-like quinolones are highly efficacious against acute and latent experimental toxoplasmosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109(39):15936-15941. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1208069109. 23. Smith AT, Livingston MR, Mai A, Filetici P, Queener SF, Sullivan WJ. Quinoline derivative MC1626, a putative GCN5 histone acetyltransferase (HAT) inhibitor, exhibits HAT-independent activity against Toxoplasma gondii. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2007;51(3):1109-1111. DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01256-06. 24. Akins CK, Panicker SE, Cunningham CL. Laboratory animals in research and teaching: Ethics, care, and methods: Am Psychol Assoc. 2005. 25. Asgari Q, Keshavarz H, Rezaeian M, Motazedian MH, Shojaee S, Mohebali M, et al. Direct effect of two naphthalene-sulfonyl-indole compounds on Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoite. J Parasitol Res. 2013;2013,1-8. DOI: 10.1155/2013/716976. 26. Buntrock RE. ChemOffice Ultra 7.0. J Chem Inf Model Comput Sci. 2002;42(6):1505-1506. DOI: 10.1021/ci025575p. 27. Trott O, Olson AJ. AutoDock Vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. J Comput Chem. 2010;31(2):455-461. DOI: 10.1002/jcc.21334. 28. Morris GM, Goodsell DS, Halliday RS, Huey R, Hart WE, Belew RK, et al. Automated docking using a Lamarckian genetic algorithm and an empirical binding 380. Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 121–128 Available online at www.sciencedirect.com journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/AJPS Original Research Paper Apoptosis of A549 cells by small interfering RNA targeting survivin delivery using poly-ß-amino ester/guanidinylated O-carboxymethyl chitosan nanoparticles Yue Tang*, Yun Liu, Yuwen Xie, Jing Chen, Yushun Dou Department of Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198, China a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t Article history: Gene-based therapeutics has emerged as a promising approach for human cancer ther- Received 26 January 2018 apy. Among a variety of non-viral vectors, polymer vectors are particularly attractive due Revised 8 September 2018 to their safety and multivalent groups on their surface. This study focuses on guanidiny- Accepted 26 September 2018 lated O-carboxymethyl chitosan (GOCMCS) along with poly-ß-amino ester(PBAE) for siRNA Available online 27 November 2018 delivery. Binding efficiency of PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles were characterized by gel electrophoresis. The siRNA-loaded nanoparticles were found to be stable in the presence of Keywords: Poly-ß-amino ester RNase A, serum and BALF respectively. Fine particle fraction (FPF) which was determined by a two-stage impinger (TSI) was 57.8% ± 2.6%. The particle size and zeta potential of the Guanidinylated O-carboxymethyl nanoparticles were 153.8 ± 12.54 nm and + 12.2 ± 4.94 mV. In vitro cell transfection studies chitosan were carried out with A549 cells. The cellular uptake was significantly increased. When the Nanoparticles cells were incubated with siSurvivin-loaded nanoparticles, it could induce 26.83% ± 0.59% Gene delivery apoptosis of A549 cells and the gene silencing level of survivin expression in A549 cells were 30.93% ± 2.27%. The results suggested that PBAE/GOCMCS nanoparticle was a very promising gene delivery carrier. © 2019 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 1. Introduction According to the latest statistics, lung cancer leads the highest fatality among all cancer diseases [1]. Lung cancer is divided into non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC). NSCLC also has different types, such as adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, large cell carci- * noma and so on. At present, the two common ways to treat this disease is surgery and chemo-radiotherapy [2]. But these approaches are expensive, painful and sometimes inefficient. Gene therapy can bring patients with high therapeutic effects and low side effects when treating cancer diseases [3]. It refers to correcting or replacing a defective gene by introducing normal gene or therapeutic gene fragment into target cells, and it has been extensively studied for treating primary Corresponding author. Department of Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198, China. Tel.: +86 13851713608. E-mail address: tangyue@cpu.edu.cn (Y. Tang). Peer review under responsibility of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajps.2018.09.009 1818-0876/© 2019 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 122 Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 121–128 Scheme 1 – Synthetic route of GOCMCS. immunodeficiency [4], hemophilia [5], heart failure [6]. RNA interference (RNAi) is a genetic surveillance mechanism that permits the sequence-specific post transcriptional manipulation of gene expression in an accurate manner [7,8]. siRNAmediated cellular regulation by the RNAi-based pathway could offer a new paradigm in anti-cancer [9]. The clinical treatments show that delivery of gene to cancer cells recently face some obstacles for lack of suitable delivery vectors, proper therapeutic gene and feasible route of administration [10,11]. Hence, developing new delivery approaches is urging. Delivery vectors used for gene therapy include viral vectors and non-viral vectors [12]. Compared with viral vectors, non-viral vectors show weaker immunogenicity and lower cytotoxicity, which have a wider application in gene therapy [13]. Poly(ß-amino ester) (PBAE) is a brand-new type of cationic polymer material. PBAE is studied extensively for its biocompatibility and biodegradability [14]. To date, many research articles about PBAE focused on modifying polymers’ structure or preparing ternary nanoparticles to improve the delivery efficiency of RNAi [15]. O-carboxymethyl chitosan (OCMCS) is a kind of amphiprotic ether derivative, which owns better physicochemical and biological properties [16]. It has emerged as a promising biomaterial in various fields, and it has been proved that OCMCS could significantly inhibit tumor cell migration in vitro [17]. However, there are still many challenges to address for its use in gene delivery system. To improve transfection efficiency, Park et al. modified OCMCS by grafting polyethylenimine [18]. Cell penetrating peptides (CPPs) can promote cell uptake of macromolecules because of the transmembrane transport capacity of guanidine groups. The guanidine group can be formed by the nucleophilic substitution reaction of primary amino groups with isobutamic compound. Luo et al. reported that guanidinylation of chitosan decreased cytotoxicity, facilitated cellular internalization and, at length enhanced the gene silencing efficiency [19]. In our previous study, guanidinylated O-carboxymethyl chitosan (GOCMCS) was synthesised by converted guanidinos with aminos of OCMCS (Scheme 1), and the results had been proved that GOCMCS could improve the transfection efficiency compared with OCMCS [20]. Parenteral administration of siRNA has challenges due to nuclease degradation and renal clearance in the systemic circulation [21]. At current stage, most of non-viral gene therapy systems applied in clinical trials are through intravenous Scheme 2 – The structure of PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles and its biological properties. and subcutaneous administration route. Only a few drug delivery systems are administered nasally [22]. Pulmonary administration takes the advantage of low drug dosage, quick absorption, bioavailability, stability and proves to be a patientfriendly delivery system [23,24]. Pulmonary administration includes aerosolized inhalation, metered-dose inhalation, and dry powder inhalation. The inhalation devices include nebulizers, pressurized metered dose inhalers(pMDIs) and dry powder inhalers (DPIs). Each type of inhalation device has its advantages and disadvantages [21]. The objective of this study was to develop nanoparticles with core–shell structure based on PBAE and GOCMCS for successful pulmonary delivery of siRNA. Scheme 2 shows the structure of the nanoparticles. The nanoparticles were prepared based on electrostatic self-assembly and the stability of the formulations were evaluated by gel retardation. The cytotoxicity, cell uptake and gene knockdown efficiency of these nanoparticles were tested in A549 cells. The aerodynamic behavior of nebulized nanoparticles were also assessed. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Materials The GOCMCS and amine-terminated PBAE were synthesized in previous studies [20]. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide(MTT)were purchased from D&B Biological Science and Technology Co.Ltd (shanghai, China). Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 121–128 Agarose was from Solarbio Biotech Co. Ltd. (Beijing, China). 1 × JJ Red was obtained from Biolite Biotech Co. Ltd. (Tianjing, China). Chlorpromazine, genestin and amiloride were purchased from Aldrich Chemical Co. (Shanghai, China). Filipin III were obtained from Cayman Chemical Co. (Ann Arbor, MI). Trypsin, penicillin, streptomycin, RPMI1640 cell culture medium, Annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide (PI) apoptosis assays kit, Hoechst 33,342 and Trizol total RNA extraction reagent were from KeyGen BioTech (Nanjing, China). The qRT-PCR quantitation kit, FAM labeled siRNA, negative control siRNA (siNC) and survivin siRNA (siSurvivin) were synthesized by GenePharm (Shanghai, China). 2.2. Cell lines and culture conditions A549(the human lung adenocarcinoma cells) were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and were cultured at 37 °C in 5% CO2 atmosphere in complete RPMI1640 medium (containing 10% FBS, 100 units/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin). 2.3. Preparation and characterization of nanoparticles Appropriate amounts of PBAE (1 mg/ml) solution was mixed with siRNA (100 ng/µl) solution and vortexed for 10 s. Then PBAE/siRNA complexes were incubated at room temperature for 20 min to allow self-assembly. To prepare GOCMCS coated complexes, GOCMCS solution (1 mg/ml) was added to binary complexes at various weight ratio (50:1:20, PBAE: siRNA: GOCMCS,w/w/w), then, mixed well and incubated for another 20 min at room temperature [15]. The particles size and zeta-potential of PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS complexes were determined with the dynamic light scattering technique (DLS) with a Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK). PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS complexs binding assay were confirmed by gel electrophoresis. First, 1% agarose gel was prepared by dissolving agarose in 1 × TAE buffer(made of 40 mM Tris, 20 mM Acetate and 1 mM EDTA), the gel was heated to melt completely. and 1 × JJ Red was added in the gel. The previous nanoparticles were mixed with 6 × loading buffer (0.15% Bromophenol Blue, 0.15% xylenecyanol ff, 5 mmol/l EDTA and 50% Glycerol) and DEPC water was used to adjust the total volume. All the samples were loaded on each well (100 ng siRNA per well), and electrophoresed at a constant voltage of 100 V for 20 min. Finally, the gel was visualized by UV illumination and photoed by Gel imaging system.Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 121–128Available online at www.sciencedirect.comjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/AJPSOriginal Research PaperApoptosis of A549 cells by small interfering RNAtargeting survivin delivery using poly-ß-aminoester/guanidinylated O-carboxymethyl chitosan nanoparticlesYue Tang*, Yun Liu, Yuwen Xie, Jing Chen, Yushun DouDepartment of Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198, Chinaa r t i c l ei n f oa b s t r a c tArticle history:Gene-based therapeutics has emerged as a promising approach for human cancer ther-Received 26 January 2018apy. Among a variety of non-viral vectors, polymer vectors are particularly attractive dueRevised 8 September 2018to their safety and multivalent groups on their surface. This study focuses on guanidiny-Accepted 26 September 2018lated O-carboxymethyl chitosan (GOCMCS) along with poly-ß-amino ester(PBAE) for siRNAAvailable online 27 November 2018delivery. Binding efficiency of PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles were characterized by gelelectrophoresis. The siRNA-loaded nanoparticles were found to be stable in the presence ofKeywords:Poly-ß-amino esterRNase A, serum and BALF respectively. Fine particle fraction (FPF) which was determinedby a two-stage impinger (TSI) was 57.8% ± 2.6%. The particle size and zeta potential of theGuanidinylated O-carboxymethylnanoparticles were 153.8 ± 12.54 nm and + 12.2 ± 4.94 mV. In vitro cell transfection studieschitosanwere carried out with A549 cells. The cellular uptake was significantly increased. When theNanoparticlescells were incubated with siSurvivin-loaded nanoparticles, it could induce 26.83% ± 0.59%Gene deliveryapoptosis of A549 cells and the gene silencing level of survivin expression in A549 cells were30.93% ± 2.27%. The results suggested that PBAE/GOCMCS nanoparticle was a very promising gene delivery carrier.© 2019 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license.(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)1.IntroductionAccording to the latest statistics, lung cancer leads the highest fatality among all cancer diseases [1]. Lung cancer is divided into non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small celllung cancer (SCLC). NSCLC also has different types, such asadenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, large cell carci-*noma and so on. At present, the two common ways to treatthis disease is surgery and chemo-radiotherapy [2]. But theseapproaches are expensive, painful and sometimes inefficient.Gene therapy can bring patients with high therapeutic effects and low side effects when treating cancer diseases [3].It refers to correcting or replacing a defective gene by introducing normal gene or therapeutic gene fragment into targetcells, and it has been extensively studied for treating primaryCorresponding author. Department of Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198, China. Tel.: +86 13851713608.E-mail address: tangyue@cpu.edu.cn (Y. Tang).Peer review under responsibility of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajps.2018.09.0091818-0876/© 2019 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. This is an open access article under theCC BY-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)122Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 121–128Scheme 1 – Synthetic route of GOCMCS.immunodeficiency [4], hemophilia [5], heart failure [6]. RNAinterference (RNAi) is a genetic surveillance mechanism thatpermits the sequence-specific post transcriptional manipulation of gene expression in an accurate manner [7,8]. siRNAmediated cellular regulation by the RNAi-based pathwaycould offer a new paradigm in anti-cancer [9]. The clinicaltreatments show that delivery of gene to cancer cells recently face some obstacles for lack of suitable delivery vectors, proper therapeutic gene and feasible route of administration [10,11]. Hence, developing new delivery approaches isurging.Delivery vectors used for gene therapy include viral vectors and non-viral vectors [12]. Compared with viral vectors,non-viral vectors show weaker immunogenicity and lower cytotoxicity, which have a wider application in gene therapy[13]. Poly(ß-amino ester) (PBAE) is a brand-new type of cationicpolymer material. PBAE is studied extensively for its biocompatibility and biodegradability [14]. To date, many research articles about PBAE focused on modifying polymers’ structureor preparing ternary nanoparticles to improve the delivery efficiency of RNAi [15].O-carboxymethyl chitosan (OCMCS) is a kind of amphiprotic ether derivative, which owns better physicochemical andbiological properties [16]. It has emerged as a promising biomaterial in various fields, and it has been proved that OCMCScould significantly inhibit tumor cell migration in vitro [17].However, there are still many challenges to address for its usein gene delivery system. To improve transfection efficiency,Park et al. modified OCMCS by grafting polyethylenimine [18].Cell penetrating peptides (CPPs) can promote cell uptake ofmacromolecules because of the transmembrane transportcapacity of guanidine groups. The guanidine group can beformed by the nucleophilic substitution reaction of primaryamino groups with isobutamic compound. Luo et al. reportedthat guanidinylation of chitosan decreased cytotoxicity, facilitated cellular internalization and, at length enhanced thegene silencing efficiency [19]. In our previous study, guanidinylated O-carboxymethyl chitosan (GOCMCS) was synthesisedby converted guanidinos with aminos of OCMCS (Scheme 1),and the results had been proved that GOCMCS could improvethe transfection efficiency compared with OCMCS [20].Parenteral administration of siRNA has challenges due tonuclease degradation and renal clearance in the systemic circulation [21]. At current stage, most of non-viral gene therapy systems applied in clinical trials are through intravenousScheme 2 – The structure of PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCSnanoparticles and its biological properties.and subcutaneous administration route. Only a few drug delivery systems are administered nasally [22]. Pulmonary administration takes the advantage of low drug dosage, quickabsorption, bioavailability, stability and proves to be a patientfriendly delivery system [23,24]. Pulmonary administration includes aerosolized inhalation, metered-dose inhalation, anddry powder inhalation. The inhalation devices include nebulizers, pressurized metered dose inhalers(pMDIs) and drypowder inhalers (DPIs). Each type of inhalation device has itsadvantages and disadvantages [21].The objective of this study was to develop nanoparticleswith core–shell structure based on PBAE and GOCMCS for successful pulmonary delivery of siRNA. Scheme 2 shows thestructure of the nanoparticles. The nanoparticles were prepared based on electrostatic self-assembly and the stabilityof the formulations were evaluated by gel retardation. The cytotoxicity, cell uptake and gene knockdown efficiency of thesenanoparticles were tested in A549 cells. The aerodynamic behavior of nebulized nanoparticles were also assessed.2.Materials and methods2.1.MaterialsThe GOCMCS and amine-terminated PBAE were synthesizedin previous studies [20]. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide(MTT)were purchased from D&BBiological Science and Technology Co.Ltd (shanghai, China).Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 121–128Agarose was from Solarbio Biotech Co. Ltd. (Beijing, China).1 × JJ Red was obtained from Biolite Biotech Co. Ltd. (Tianjing, China). Chlorpromazine, genestin and amiloride werepurchased from Aldrich Chemical Co. (Shanghai, China). Filipin III were obtained from Cayman Chemical Co. (AnnArbor, MI). Trypsin, penicillin, streptomycin, RPMI1640 cellculture medium, Annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide (PI)apoptosis assays kit, Hoechst 33,342 and Trizol total RNA extraction reagent were from KeyGen BioTech (Nanjing, China).The qRT-PCR quantitation kit, FAM labeled siRNA, negativecontrol siRNA (siNC) and survivin siRNA (siSurvivin) were synthesized by GenePharm (Shanghai, China).2.2.Cell lines and culture conditionsA549(the human lung adenocarcinoma cells) were obtainedfrom American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and were cultured at 37 °C in 5% CO2 atmosphere in complete RPMI1640medium (containing 10% FBS, 100 units/ml penicillin and100 µg/ml streptomycin).2.3.Preparation and characterization of nanoparticlesAppropriate amounts of PBAE (1 mg/ml) solution was mixedwith siRNA (100 ng/µl) solution and vortexed for 10 s. ThenPBAE/siRNA complexes were incubated at room temperature for 20 min to allow self-assembly. To prepare GOCMCScoated complexes, GOCMCS solution (1 mg/ml) was addedto binary complexes at various weight ratio (50:1:20, PBAE:siRNA: GOCMCS,w/w/w), then, mixed well and incubated foranother 20 min at room temperature [15]. The particles sizeand zeta-potential of PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS complexes weredetermined with the dynamic light scattering technique (DLS)with a Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments, Malvern,UK).PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS complexs binding assay were confirmed by gel electrophoresis.First, 1% agarose gel was prepared by dissolving agarosein 1 × TAE buffer(made of 40 mM Tris, 20 mM Acetate and1 mM EDTA), the gel was heated to melt completely. and 1 × JJRed was added in the gel. The previous nanoparticles weremixed with 6 × loading buffer (0.15% Bromophenol Blue, 0.15%xylenecyanol ff, 5 mmol/l EDTA and 50% Glycerol) and DEPCwater was used to adjust the total volume. All the sampleswere loaded on each well (100 ng siRNA per well), and electrophoresed at a constant voltage of 100 V for 20 min. Finally,the gel was visualized by UV illumination and photoed by Gelimaging system.The protection against RNase A degradation assay wasdetected by agarose gel electrophoresis [25]. Naked siRNAand siRNA-loaded nanoparticles was incubated with RNase A(25 mg/ml, 37 °C) for 24 h, respectively. At predetermined timeinterval (0 h, 0.5 h, 2 h, 4 h, 12 h, 24 h), 20 µl of the sample wasremoved and put into hot water at 80 °C to stop the reaction,and amounts of sodium heparin were added to release freesiRNA.To investigate the stability of PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCSnanoparticles in fetal bovine serum (FBS) and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), the nanoparticles and naked siRNA123were incubated with 10% FBS or BALF at 37 °C at certaintime interval (0 h,0.5 h,2 h,4 h,12 h,18 h), naked siRNA wasset as negative control. After all the samples were collected,heparin was added into each sample to detach siRNA fromthe nanoparticles. SiRNA integrity was investigated by the gelelectrophoresis.2.4.Nebulization of formulations and aerodynamicbehaviorThe siRNA-loaded nanoparticles were nebulized by using Omron NE-C801 (Kyoto, Japan) to deliver into lung. To assess theintegrity of the siRNA-loaded nanoparticles after nebulization,gel electrophoresis was carried out. The naked siRNA was setas negative control. siRNA-loaded nanoparticles and nakedsiRNA were compared before and after nebulization respectively.Aerosol performance was measured by using a twostage impinger (TSI) according to Chinese Pharmacopoeia.First, the FITC-loaded GOCMCS was synthesized as previousstudies [20]. Then PBAE/siRNA/FITC-GOCMCS nanoparticles(50:1:20,w/w/w) was prepared as mentioned above. Then, theprepared nanoparticles were move into the nebulizer reservoir which attached to TSI. Adjust the flow rate to 60 ± 5 l/minusing vacuum pump. After TSI test, the aerosol formulationswere collected completely. The fluorescence intensity of FITClabeled nanoparticles in every stages was measured respectively at excitation wavelengths of 492 nm and emission wavelengths 518 nm by automatic microplate reader (POLARstarOmega, BMG, Germany). Fine particle fraction (FPF) was defined as the amount of FITC-loaded nanoparticles in Stage2(mass median aerodynamic diameter < 6.4 lm) as percentageof the total nanoparticles released into the TSI.2.5.In vitro cytotoxicity assayFAM-labeled siRNA was used in order to be able to detect by flow cytometry (MACSQuant Analyzer 10, Miltenyi,Germany). PBAE/FAM-siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles was prepared as previous, briefly, FAM-labeled siRNA (50 nM) wasadded into PBAE solutions (1 mg/ml) at a weight ratio of 50:1,then vortexed 10 s and incurbated at 37 °C for 30 min inthe dark to prepare PBAE/FAM-siRNA binary nanoparticles.To prepare PBAE/FAM-siRNA/GOCMCS ternary nanoparticles,then, added the binary nanoparticles dropwise into GOCMCS(1 mg/ml) solution, and then incubated at room temperaturefor another 30 min in the dark.A549 cells were seeded on 96-well plates at 2 × 104 cells/ml,cultured in complete medium RPMI1640 for 24 h.The mediumwas replaced with free RPMI 1640 (200 µl) which containedPBAE/FAM-siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles at various concentration (10 µg/ml, 25 µg/ml, 50 µg/ml and 200 µg/ml). After incubation at 37 °C for 24 h, the medium was changed with MTTsolution (180 µl free RPMI 1640 and 20 µl MTT (1 mg/ml)), continue incubated at 37 °C for 4 h. Then removed the medium,and added 200 µl DMSO, incubated for another 10 min. Using enzyme standard instrument to measure absorbance at490 nm.1242.6.Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 121–128Cellular uptake and mechanismsA549 cells was seeded in 6-well plates at a density of 2 × 105cells/ml and incubated for 12 h. Cells were washed with PBS,and the medium was replaced with free RPMI 1640 which contained PBAE/FAM-siRNA nanoparticles (50:1, w/w), PBAE/FAMsiRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles (50:1:20, w/w/w) respectively,and incubated for 6 h. Then the media was removed, thecells were washed twice with PBS, harvested with trypsin,centrifuged, re-suspended in PBS, and then analyzed by flowcytometry instrument to assay the cellular uptake ability.Furthermore, fluorescence microscope (Olympus IX53, Japan)was used to qualitatively observe the cells uptake. A549 cellswere transfected with PBAE/FAM-siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles for 6 h, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, and stained withHoechst 33342.To obtain the best time when the mean fluorescence intensity for the cellular uptake was biggest, the cells were incubated with the PBAE/FAM-siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles forseries time (2 h, 4 h, 6 h, 24 h), other operations are similar withcellular uptake assay.To study the endocytosis pathway of PBAE/FAMsiRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles, cells were pre-incubatedat 4 °C or incubated with endocytic inhibitors at 37 °C for30 min. The endocytic inhibitors we used were sodium azide(1 mg/ml), chlorpromazine (10 mg/ml), hypertonic sucrose(450 mM), genistein (200 µM), filipin (5 µg/ml), amiloride(13.3 µg/ml) [20]. Then the cells were incubated withPBAE/FAM-siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles for another 4 h.Finally, the cells were subjected to flow cytometry analysis.2.7.Apoptosis of A549 cellsA549 cells were seeded on 6-well plates and culturedovernight for attachment. Then the medium was replacedwith free RPMI 1640 that contained PBAE/siSurvivin/GOCMCSnanoparticles, and incubated for 6 h, then replaced the solution with free RPMI 1640, and cultured for another 42 h. Finally,the cells were washed twice with PBS, detached by trypsinwithout EDTA, collected, centrifuged, and resuspend twicewith PBS. Ultimately, the cells were suspended in 300 µl binding buffer, added 5 µl Annexin V-FITC for 15 min and furtherstained with PI before analyzed by flow cytometry instrument.All the operation need to be done in the dark. Cells incubatedonly with medium and cells incubated with naked siSurvivinwere set as the control.2.8.Gene silencing experimentThe gene silencing efficiency of PBAE/siSurvivin/GOCMCSnanoparticles were determined by quantitative real timereverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).A549 cells were seeded in 6-well plates. After the cellsreaching 70%–80% confluence, the culture medium waschanged with fresh complete medium respectively containing mocks, PBAE/siNC/GOCMCS nanoparticles, and aminePBAE/siSurvivin/GOCMCS nanoparticles. After incubating for6 h, the medium contained samples were replaced with freshserum-free medium, and further cultured for another 42 h.Then the cells were washed with PBS and lysed by Trizolreagent. The isolated total RNA was quantified by micro UVSpectrophotometer Nano 100 (All for life science, China) at260 nm. RT-PCR was performed by using the SYBR Green Idye method. The data was analyzed by using the comparativeCT(2-CT ) method.3.Results and discussion3.1.Formation and characterization of nanoparticlesThe particle size and the zeta potential of various formulation with various weight ratio and concentration weredetermined by dynamic light scattering (DLS). The bestparticle size was 153.8 ± 12.54 nm, and the zeta potentialwas + 12.2 ± 4.94 mV when PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles was 50:1:20(w/w/w, 1 mg/ml, 100 ng/µl, 1 mg/ml). A goodgene delivery system must be able to bind to siRNA, andcondense it into nanoparticles. To investigate the condensation ability of PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles, agarose gelretardation electrophoresis assay was performed at variousweight ratio(PBAE/siRNA). In our study, 50 nM naked siRNAwas set as control, as the optimal transfection concentration of siRNA is in the range of 50–100 nM for in vitro experiments [26]. As shown in Fig. 1A, the complete retardation ofsiRNA mobility in the nanoparticles was achieved when theweight ratio was 50:1:20 (PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS), at this point,the quantity of siRNA was 250 nM.As shown in Fig. 1B, naked siRNA degraded rapidly andcould not be observed within 0.5 h after it was incubatedwith RNase A. However, PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticlescould be observed for a few hours. These results suggestedthat a certain amount of the siRNA was encapsulated intothe nanoparticles, and the nanoparticles protected the siRNAfrom RNase A degradation.In order to investigate the stability of the nanoparticles inlung and serum, naked siRNA and siRNA-loaded the nanoparticles were incubated with serum or BALF for 18 h. As Fig. 1Cshown, naked siRNA and siRNA-loaded nanoparticles bothcould be observed after incubation in BALF for 18 h. NakedsiRNA was hardly detected after incubation with serum for12 h, while under the protection of the nanoparticles, the integrity of siRNA was maintained for 18 h (or longer). That is tosay, the integrity of siRNA in serum was enhanced for the protection of nanoparticles compared with naked siRNA. Importantly, the results also suggested that siRNA was more stablein lung than in serum and indicated that it was more suitablefor pulmonary delivery.3.2.Nebulization of formulations and aerodynamicbehaviorThe nanoparticles were nebulized with Omron NE-C801 (Kyoto, Japan). The integrity of the siRNA after and before nebulization was evaluated by gel electrophoresis assays. As shownin Fig. 1D, the integrity of naked siRNA was decreased afternebulization (Fig. 1D, lane 2) due to the thermal energy generating from the process of nebulization [27]. The band ofAsian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 121–128125Fig. 1 – (A) Gel retardation analysis of siRNA binding with PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles. (B) RNase A protection assayof naked siRNA and PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles. (C) Gel electrophoresis assays the stability of siRNA in serum andBALF. (D)Gel electrophoresis of naked siRNA integrity before and after nebulization: Lane1:pre-nebulization of naked siRNA;Lane 2:post nebulization of naked siRNA. (E) Gel electrophoresis of PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles integrity before andafter nebulization: Lane 1:pre-nebulization of nanoparticles; Lane 2: post nebulization of nanoparticles; Lane 3:nanoparticles dissociated with heparin; Lane 4: nebulized nanoparticles dissociated with heparin.was no significant difference between the aerodynamic performance of PBAE/FITC-GOCMCS nanoparticles and that ofPBAE/siRNA/FITC-GOCMCS nanoparticles. Hence, the loading of siRNA had no effect on the aerodynamic behaviorof nanoparticles. The high FPF of PBAE/siRNA/FITC-GOCMCSnanoparticles suggested that this delivery system is suitablefor deep lung deposition and could serve as potential candidate for siRNA pulmonary delivery.3.3.Fig. 2 – Nanoparticles deposition percentage of thenebulizer reservoir and each stage following nebulization(mean ± SD, n = 3).the siRNA-loaded nanoparticles was retarded in the well after nebulization (Fig. 1E, lane 2), and a bright and clear bandof siRNA could also be observed after using heparin to dissociate nanoparticles (Fig. 1E, lane 4). The results suggested thatsiRNA can be successfully loaded into nanoparticles to overcome the shear force of aerosolization process and conserveits integrity.FITC was used to quantify the concentration of thenanoparticles, FITC-labeled GOCMCS had been synthesizedin previous study [20]. PBAE/siRNA/FITC-labeled GOCMCSnanoparticles were prepared as previous described. The portion of nanoparticles deposited in the stage 2 of impinger, representing the FPF of nanoparticles, was quantified by measuring the fluorescence intensity in every stages. As shownin Fig. 2., the FPF of PBAE/FITC-GOCMCS nanoparticles andPBAE/siRNA/FITC-GOCMCS nanoparticles were 59.2% ± 3.4%and 57.8% ± 2.6%, respectively (P > 0.05), indicating that thereCytotoxicity assayThe basic cytotoxicity caused by the nanoparticles was evaluated in A549 cells by MTT assay, as presented in Fig. 3A,the PBAE/siNC nanoparticles showed low cytotoxicity. Although the same quantity of PBAE was utilized for genecomplexation, PBAE/siNC /GOCMCS nanoparticles showednumerical slightly lower toxicity than PBAE/siNC nanoparticles. It was worth noting that cell viability was higher than80% for the nanoparticles in contrast with PEI. Statistical analysis was performed using t-test and it had been proved thatthere was no significant difference between the cell viabilityof PBAE/siNC/GOCMCS nanoparticles and that of PBAE/siNCnanoparticles. It proved that PBAE can bind siRNA to form stable nanoparticles with low cytotoxicity, and it is a promisingagent for non-viral gene delivery [28,29].3.4.Cellular uptake and mechanismsThe cellular uptake of the siRNA was evaluated qualitatively and quantitatively via flow cytometric methods (Fig. 3B)and fluorescent microscopy (Fig. 4), respectively. As shownin Fig. 3B, the cellular uptake efficiency of PBAE/FAM-siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles was higher than PBAE/FAM-siRNAnanoparticles. The results proved that the group of guanidinehas the similar effect of CPPs which promoted the uptake ofthe nanoparticles. On the other hand, GOCMCS balanced thepositive charge of the nanoparticles, therefore, the nanoparticles was easily endocytosis into the cells [30]. Compared withPBAE/FAM-siRNA nanoparticles (Fig. 4A), the strongest greencolor in the merged image (Fig. 4B) represented that to someextents successful qualitative cellular uptake took place bythe PBAE/FAM-siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticle.126Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 121–128Fig. 3 – Cellular uptake and mechanisms of polymer/siRNA nanoparticles. (A) Cytotoxicity of siNC loaded polymers testedwith A549 cells, (n = 6). (B) Internalization identification of nanoparticles in A549 cells with flow cytometric analysis.(C) Quantification of cell internalization at various time was shown by mean fluorescence intensity (MFI). (D) Effects ofendocytosis inhibitors and temperature on the internalization of siNC loaded nanoparticles (n = 3), Relative uptakelevel(%) = MFI (treated group)/MFI (control group) × 100%.Fig. 4 – Fluorescence images of A549 about cellular uptakeafter incubated with FAM-siRNA loaded polymernanoparticles for 6 h.(A) A549 cells were treated withPBAE/siRNA nanoparticles, (B) PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCSnanoparticles. Images showed fluorescent overlay of siRNA(green, FAM-labeled) and nuclear (blue, Hoechst33342stained).The nanoparticles exhibited time-dependent cellular uptake upon incubation. As shown in Fig. 3C, the highest cellular uptake efficiency was at 6 h, When the time prolonged to24 h, the uptake efficiency had no obvious increase, this maybe due to the cellular uptake of the nanoparticles had reachedsaturation, or FAM-siRNA was degraded and the fluorescencequenched gradually. Thus, the cellular uptake time was set at6 h.Endocytic inhibitors were applied to investigate the endocytosis pathways of the nanoparticles to delivery into thecell. Energy dependent processes endocytic pathways can beinhibited by low temperature and sodium azide which isan ATPase inhibitor. Clathrin dependent endocytosis can beinhibited by hypertonic sucrose and chlorpromazine. Filipinand genistein can be used as the inhibitors for caveolae dependent endocytosis. Amiloride can block macropinocytosis[31]. As shown in Fig. 3D, when the cell was incubated withsodium azide or at 4 °C, there revealed an significant inhibitory effects. This result indicated that the delivery of thenanoparticles was energy-dependent endocytosis. When theAsian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 121–128127Fig. 5 – (A) Flow cytometry analysis of A549 cells for apoptosis after treatment with PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS nanoparticles(n = 3). (B) siSurvivin-mediated silencing of A549 assessed by using qRT-PCR (Cq), GAPDH was set as endogenousreference gene (n = 3).cells were incubated with chlorpromazine and hypertonic sucrose (clathrin-mediated endocytosis inhibitors) the cellularuptake level of the nanoparticles was relatively lower than filipin and genistein (caveolae-mediated endocytosis inhibitors).The uptake level of samples was lower than 70%. Therefore,clathrin-mediated and caveolae-dependent endocytosis bothinvolved in mediating the cellular uptake of the nanoparticles,but more dependent on clathrin mediated endocytosis pathway.3.5.Apoptosis of A549 cellsThe apoptotic effect of the survivin siRNA carried byPBAE/GOCMCS nanoparticles was determined qualitativelyusing Annexin V/PI double staining assay [32]. The resultswere evaluated by flow cytometry (MACSQuant Analyzer 10,Miltenyi, Germany). The apoptotic cells are shown on Fig. 5A.Q1 indicated necrotic cells (UL), Q2 the late apoptotic cells(UR) Q3 early apoptotic cells (LR) and Q4 indicated the living cells (LL), each groups calculated cell number in the formpercentage. The sum of Q2 and Q3 represented cell apoptosis rate, thus, the survivin siRNA introduced in the A549 cellby PBAE/GOCMCS nanoparticles caused 26.83% ± 0.59% (P <0.01) apoptosis cells compared with siNC-loaded nanoparticles treated group. The reason why the apoptosis increasedmight be attributed to the high cellular uptake efficiency intoA549 cells.30.93% ± 2.27% (P < 0.001) in survivin mRNA level whentreated with PBAE/siSurvivin/GOCMCS nanoparticles. Theseresults suggested that PBAE/GOCMCS nanoparticles would bea promising gene delivery vector.4.ConclusionsIn summary, we have developed promising PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS ternary nanoparticles based on electrostatical coatings as an efficient non-viral gene delivery system with excellent biocompatibility in vitro and in vivo. The additionof GOCMCS markedly performed high cellular uptake inA549, and the PBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS ternary complexes presented higher gene transfection efficiency in vitro and in vivothan the PBAE/siRNA binary complexes. It is concluded thatPBAE/siRNA/GOCMCS may be a applicable gene delivery strategy of therapeutic genes to treat tumor in vivo.Conflicts of interestThe authors declare no conflicts of interest.Acknowledgment3.6.The gene silencingIn this study, the gene silencing efficiency was evaluated by RT-PCR. Survivin siRNA was used as a modelgene. siNC-loaded nanoparticles was set as a negative control, the results found that the carrier had no effect onthe gene expression. The outcomes are shown in Fig. 5Bas a bar chart. The results showed significant reductionThis work was supported by the 3rd Jiangsu Overseas Research& Training Program for University Prominent Young & Middleaged Teachers and Presidents; the College Students Innovation Project for the R&D of Novel Drugs [No. J1310032]. Andwe would like to thank cell and molecular biology experimentplatform of China Pharmaceutical University for the assistance with relevant test items.128Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 121–128references[1] Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2017. CACancer J Clin 2017;67(1):7–30.[2] Weaver H, Coonar AS. Lung cancer: Diagnosis, staging andtreatment. Surgery (Oxford) 2017;35(5):247–54.[3] Zhou Z, Liu X, Zhu D, Wang Y, Zhang Z, Zhou X,et al. Nonviral cancer gene therapy: Delivery cascade andvector nanoproperty integration. Adv Drug Deliv Rev2017;115:115–54.[4] Thrasher AJ, Williams DA. Evolving gene therapy in primaryimmunodeficiency. Mol Ther 2017;25(5):1132–41.[5] Nienhuis AW, Nathwani AC, Davidoff AM. Gene therapy forhemophilia. Mol Ther 2017;25(5):1163–7.[6] Greenberg B. Gene therapy for heart failure. TrendsCardiovasc Med 2017;27(3):216–22.[7] Mizrahy S, Hazan-Halevy I, Dammes N, Landesman-Milo D,Peer D. Current progress in non-viral RNAi-based deliverystrategies to lymphocytes. Mol Ther 2017;25(7):1491–500.[8] Lee SK, Kumar P. Conditional RNAi: Towards a silent genetherapy. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2009;61(7-8):650–64.[9] Ballarín-González B, Ebbesen MF, Howard KA.Polycation-based nanoparticles for RNAi-mediated cancertreatment. Cancer Lett 2014;352(1):66–80.[10] Jiang XC, Gao JQ. Exosomes as novel bio-carriers for geneand drug delivery. Int J Pharm 2017;521(1-2):167–75.[11] Xu C, Wang J. Delivery systems for siRNA drug developmentin cancer therapy. Asian J Pharm Sci 2015;10:1–12.[12] Germershaus O, Nultsch K. Localized, non-viral delivery ofnucleic acids: Opportunities, challenges and currentstrategies. Asian J Pharm Sci 2015;10:159–75.[13] Oliveira AV, Rosa da Costa AM, Silva GA. Non-viral strategiesfor ocular gene delivery. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl2017;77:1275–89.[14] Kima K, Chen WCW, Heo Y, Wang Y. Polycations and theirbiomedical applications. Prog Polym Sci 2016;60:18–50.[15] Gu J, Wang X, Jiang X, Chen Y, Chen L, Fang X,et al. Self-assembled carboxymethyl poly (L-histidine) coatedpoly (b-amino ester)/DNA complexes for gene transfection.Biomaterials 2012;33(2):644–58.[16] Upadhyaya L, Singh J, Agarwal V, Tewari RP. Biomedicalapplications of carboxymethyl chitosans. Carbohydr Polym2013;91(1):452–66.[17] Jiang Z, Han B, Li H, Li X, Yang Y, Liu W. Preparation andanti-tumor metastasis of carboxymethyl chitosan.Carbohydr Polym 2015;125:53–60.[18] Park SC, Nam JP, Kim YM, Kim JH, Nah JW, Jang MK.Branched polyethylenimine-grafted-carboxymethyl chitosancopolymer enhances the delivery of pDNA or siRNA in vitroand in vivo. Int J Nanomed 2013;8:3663–77.[19] Luo Y, Zhai X, Ma C, Sun P, Fu Z, Liu W, et al. An inhalableß 2 -adrenoceptor ligand-directed guanidinylated chitosancarrier for targeted delivery of siRNA to lung. J ControlRelease 2012;162(1):28–36.[20] Ni S, Xie Y, Tang Y, Liu Y, Chen J, Zhu S. Nebulized anionicguanidinylatedO-carboxymethyl chitosan/N-2-hydroxypropyltimehyl ammonium chloride chitosannanoparticles for siRNA pulmonary delivery: Preparation,characterization and in vitro evaluation. J Drug Target2017;25(5):451–62.[21] Ruigrok MJR, Frijlink HW, Hinrichs WLJ. Pulmonaryadministration of small interfering RNA: The route to go? JControl Release 2016;235:14–23.[22] Foldvari M, Chen DW, Nafissi N, Calderon D, Narsineni L,Rafiee A. Non-viral gene therapy: Gains and challenges ofnon-invasive administration methods. J Control Release2016;240:165–90.[23] Hidalgo A, Cruz A, Pérez-Gil J. Barrier or carrier? Pulmonarysurfactant and drug delivery. Eur J Pharm Biopharm2015;95(Pt A):117–27.[24] Cipolla D, Shekunov B, Blanchard J, Hickey A. Lipid-basedcarriers for pulmonary products: Preclinical developmentand case studies in humans. Adv Drug Deliv Rev2014;75:53–80.[25] Van Woensel M, Wauthoz N, Rosière R, Mathieu V, Kiss R,Lefranc F, et al. Development of siRNA-loaded chitosannanoparticles targeting Galectin-1 for the treatment ofglioblastoma multiforme via intranasal administration. JControl Release 2016;227:71–81.[26] Alshamsan A, Hamdy S, Samuel J, El-Kadi AO, Lavasanifar A,Uludag? H. The induction of tumor apoptosis in B16melanoma following STAT3 siRNA delivery with alipid-substituted polyethylenimine. Biomaterials2010;31(6):1420–8.[27] Ni S, Liu Y, Tang Y, Chen J, Li S, Pu J, et al. GABAB receptorligand-directed trimethyl chitosan/tripolyphosphatenanoparticles and their pMDI formulation for survivin siRNApulmonary delivery. Carbohydr Polym 2018;179:135–44.[28] Vuorimaa E, Ketola TM, Green JJ, Hanzlíková M,Lemmetyinen H, Langer R, et al. Poly(ß-amino ester)–DNAcomplexes: time-resolved fluorescence and cellulartransfection studies. J Control Release 2011;154(2):171–6.[29] Kim J, Sunshine JC, Green JJ. Differential polymer structuretunes mechanism of cellular uptake and transfection routesof poly(ß-amino ester) polyplexes in human breast cancercells. Bioconjug Chem 2014;25(1):43–51.[30] Pitchaimani A, Nguyen TDT, Koirala M, Zhang Y, Aryal S.Impact of cell adhesion and migration on nanoparticleuptake and cellular toxicity. Toxicol In Vitro 2017;43:29–39.[31] Kou LF, Sun J, Zhai YL, He ZG. The endocytosis andintracellular fate of nanomedicines: Implication for rationaldesign. Asian J Pharm Sci 2013;8(1):1–10.[32] Arami S, Mahdavi M, Rashidi MR, Yekta R, Rahnamay M,Molavi L, et al. Apoptosis induction activity and moleculardocking studies of survivin siRNA carried byFe3 O4 -PEG-LAC-chitosan-PEI nanoparticles in MCF-7human breast cancer cells. J Pharm Biomed Anal2017;142:145–54.Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 356–364Available online at www.sciencedirect.comjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/AJPSOriginal Research PaperAssembling structurally customizable syntheticcarriers of siRNA through thermodynamicallyself-regulated processGuang Bai, Tong Xue, Xiaotao Dong, Uday Kumar Chinta, Jia Feng, Tuo Jin*, Fei Wu*School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, Chinaa r t i c l ei n f oa b s t r a c tArticle history:This study demonstrates that our previously reported polywraplex, a synthetic siRNA carrierReceived 31 October 2018consisting of a uni-molecular polyplex core of customizable size and a self-assembled tri-Revised 20 February 2019block copolymer envelop, may be constructed using dendrimers as the crosslinkingAccepted 13 April 2019junctions. Replacing the branched low molecular weight PEI with polyamidoamineAvailable online 23 July 2019(PAMAM) dendrimer in the zeta potential regulated polymerization resulted in the similarnetwork structured cationic polymer with electron microscopically visible crosslinkingKeywords:junctions. This visibility may offer a convenient way to characterize the molecular structureNetworked cationic polymerof the rationally designed networked siRNA-packing cationic polymer without altering itsThermodynamically self-regulatedchemical properties and biologic functions. A series of physical-chemical characterizationsprocessesand biological assays, comprising size, zeta potential, pre-phagocytic siRNA leaking andsiRNA deliverydegradation, and silencing of functional genes, confirmed that the advanced properties ofUnimolecular polyplexpolywraplexes remained with the dendrimer junctions. Although sixth generation PAMAMZeta potential regulateddendrimer was used as the crosslinking junctions in the size-customizable polymerizationpolymerizationfor electron microscopic observation, lower generation dendrimer should also work in casemore practical and structurally defined cationic polymer is needed.© 2019 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license.(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)1.IntroductionWhile the ability of nucleic acids to express, silence, edit andregulate genes enable them to be powerful therapeutic agentsin potential, the lack of safe and efficient carrier systems todeliver them to sites of action retarded practical applications[1–2]. Synthetic carriers of nucleic acids are regarded to be*safe biologically and have attracted extensive research efforts,however, the advances are still far from satisfactory [3–5].The synthetic carriers most reported to date, polyplexes,lipoplexes, micelplexes, synthetic lipidoids, and hydrophobicpolymer particles, were assembled rather randomly witharbitrary amounts of functional components immobilized[6–10]. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles with a variety ofmodified inner surface and dendritic cationic polymerCorresponding authors. School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. Tel.: +86 21 34204695.E-mail addresses: tjin@sjtu.edu.cn (T. Jin), feiwu@sjtu.edu.cn (F. Wu).Peer review under responsibility of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajps.2019.04.0081818-0876/© 2019 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. This is an open access article under theCC BY-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 356–364represent alternative synthetic carrier systems of semidefined structure [11–12]. Although the nano-architecturesof DNA or RNA may be constructed precisely through thepreprogrammed assembly, they are less functioning becausethe building blocks are chemically homogenous to what theydeliver [13–14]. There has yet to be a synthetic carrier ofnucleic acids assembled as precise in structure and functionin cell targeting as viral vectors, the nature-existing nanomachinery capable to deliver genetic materials to host cells.Despite the still-standing unmet need, reports in this fieldseem to have decreased dramatically in the literature in recentyears [15]. Even though some newly emerged topic may haveattracted public attention, lack of new strategies to overcomethe encountered difficulties may have compromised people’senthusiasm.To address the situation, we reported a preciselycustomizable and broadly applicable nano-vehicle forresearchers to easily functionalize according to their specificneeds recently [16]. This system, known as polywraplex,consists of a pH-responsive polyplex core of customizablesize and a self-assembled monolayer membrane of rationallydesigned triblock copolymer membrane to immobilizefunctional components. The polyplex-forming cationicpolymer possesses a uni-sized networked structure andimidazole-4,5-diimine involved backbone which was formedby zeta potential regulated polymerization of spermine andbranched low molecular weight PEI through imidazole-4,5dicarbaldehyde. Since the increased zeta potential of thegrowing polymer inhibited more of the cationic reactantsto approach, the polymerization was self-terminated ata size. The beauty of the art is that this size customizedcationic polymer packed siRNA intramolecularly to form auni-molecular polyplex when siRNA was gradually added intoits solution [16]. The imidazole ring involved in the polymerbackbone possesses a pKa of 5.9 for which endosomal pHmay induce protonation of the ring and disruption of thefairly stable conjugated p bond of the imine linkages [17]. Theself-assembled monolayer membrane was formed by triblockcopolymer which was consisted of: a negative multicarboxylsaccharide head that lead the whole triblock copolymer tothe polyplex core; a polycaprolactone (PCL) middle block thatformed hydrophobic layer to isolate the internal and externalwater environment and to prevent siRNA from degrading byRNase in vivo; and a poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) block whichmade the whole nanoparticle keep a neutralized conditionand prohibit siRNA non-specific absorption in vivo. This triblock copolymer membrane self-assembled around the pHresponsive polyplex core may not only prevent pre-phagocyticsiRNA leaking and charge induced non-specific bindingbut also offer a convenient way to immobilize functionalcomponents in the optimized surface population [18].To further clarify the network structure of thepolymer, we replaced the branched low molecular PEIwith polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer in the zetapotential regulated polymerization in the present studyin order to observe the crosslinking junctions electronmicroscopically. The obtained electron microscopic imagesfurther indicated the expected networked structure,and a series of physical chemical characterizations(including the surface assembly) and biological assays357confirmed the same nature and functions of polyplex andpolywraplex.2.Materials and methods2.1.MaterialsImidazole-4,5-dicarbaldehyde and PEG45-PCL20-maltotrioseCOO- was synthesized as our previous study [17–18]. Polyamidoamine (PAMAM) G6 was purchasedfrom CYD Company (Weihai, China). Spermine, PEI25k and dimethylformamide (DMF) were obtainedfrom Sigma-Aldrich (MA, USA). Anti-VEGFA sensestrand (5 -GGAGUACCCUGAUGAGAUCdTdT-3 ), antisensestrand(5 -GAUCUCAUCAGGGUACUCCdTdT-3 ),Cy3and Cy5-labeled siRNA were all purchased fromGenePharma (Shanghai, China). The VEGFA primer(forward 5 -AGGAGGGCAGAATCATCACG-3 and reverse5 -GATCCGCATAATCTGCATGGT-3 ) and the GAPDH primer(forward 5 -CCAAGGTCATCCATGACAAC-3 and reverse 5 TCCACAGTCTTCTGAGTGGC-3 ) were synthesized by andobtained from Sangon Biotech (Shanghai, China). U87MGcell line was acquired from Guo Shengrong laboratory atShanghai Jiao Tong University (Shanghai, China). 5-week-oldmale Bab/c nude mice were acquired from Experimentalanimal center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (Shanghai,China). The usage of animal was performed according to theguideline of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee(IACUC) of Shanghai Jiao Tong University.2.2.Synthesis and characterization of the networkedcationic polymerSpermine (40 mg, 0.197 mmol) in water (2 ml), Imidazole-4,5dicarbaldehyde (30 mg, 0.247 mmol) in DMF/water (1 ml/1 ml)were mixed and stirred at room temperature for 12 h, thecolor of the solution changed from colorless to dark red,following which, PAMAM (143 mg, 2.47 µmol) in water (2 ml)was added to the mixture dropwise for 2 h with continuousstirring at room temperature. The endpoint of the reactionwas measured using dynamic laser scattering (DLS) to detectthe size of the networked cationic polymer. At last, thesolution was subjected to dialysis by a cutoff size 10 KDacellulose membrane to remove the organic solution DMF andfinally lyophilized to get the final polymer [16].2.3.Formation and characterization of polyplex andpolywraplexPolyplex was formulated by dropping siRNA solution intonetworked cationic polymer in a series mass ratio ofsiRNA/cationic polymer (1/1, 1/2, 1/3, 1/5, 1/7, 1/10, 1/15and 1/20), incubated for 30 min at room temperature. ThePolyetherimide 25 K (PEI 25 K) polyplex as the positive controlgroup was processed through mixing siRNA solution andPEI 25 K solution in mass ratio (wsiRNA /wPEI25K = 1/2) in equalvolume. The condensing ability of polyplex was confirmedby agarose gel electrophoresis. Polywraplex was preparedby dropping triblock surface copolymer into the selected358Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 356–364polyplex (wsiRNA /wcationic polymer = 1/7) solution, incubatedfor 30 min at room temperature. Both particle size and Zetapotential of the polyplexes and polywraplexes were measuredusing DLS (Zetasizer Nano, Malvern). Microscopic morphologyof polyplexes and polywraplexes were determined usingtransmission electron microscope (TEM, FEI).2.4.Serum stability of polyplex and polywraplexThepolyplexwasformulatedaspresentedinSection 2.3 (wcationic polymer /wsiRNA = 7/1), and the polywraplex(wtriblock copolymer /wcationic polymer = 12/1),followedbyincubated with 50% fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 37 °C for48 h. Samples were taken at each time and detected usingelectrophoresis.2.5.Cell cultureHuman primary glioblastoma cell line U87MG was cultured inDulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Gibco) containing10% FBS, penicillin (100 units/ml), and streptomycin(100 µg/ml) in a cell incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2 .2.6.Intracellular uptake of polyplex and polywraplexusing flow cytometryU87MG cells were seeded onto 48-well microplates (10 × 104cells/well) and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. Subsequently, Cy3labeled siRNA polyplex and polywraplex (contained siRNAwas 500 ng/well) were added, respectively. After incubatingfor 4 h, the cells were harvested and detected using flowcytometry (BD). The data was assessed using FlowJo software.2.7.Intracellular distribution of the polyplex andpolywraplex using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM)U87MG cells were seeded in 12-well plate with 14 mm coverglass and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h (1 × 104 cells/well). Themedium was replaced, then the Cy3-labeled siRNA (containedsiRNA was 2000 ng) polyplex and polywraplex solution wereadded to the wells, respectively. After incubation for 4 h,the cells were washed three times with PBS, stained withLysoTracker Green (75 nM) and DAPI (2 µg/ml), and imagedusing CLSM.2.8.Cytotoxicity of the network cationic polymerU87MG cells were seeded onto 96-well microplates andincubated for 24 h at 37 °C. The cytotoxicity of the networkcationic polymer against U87MG cells was evaluated usingCell Counting Kit-8 (CCK8 kit, Dojindo). Following the CCK8 kitprotocol, the cells were incubated with the network cationicpolymer in PBS solution of concentration from 20 to 300 µg/mlfor 4 h in which the same concentrations of PEI 25k PBSsolution were as positive control, then the CCK-8 agent wasadded into the 96-well microplates. After 2 h, the absorbanceat 450 nm was measured using microplate reader (MolecularDevices). The result was normalized to untreated cells.2.9.Determination of VEGFA gene silence of polyplex andpolywraplex in U87MG cells using qPCRU87 MG cells were seeded onto 24 well microplates (10 × 105cells /well) and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h, polyplex (containedsiRNA was 1 µg /well) were added onto the wells andincubated in FBS free DMEM culture for 4 h, subsequently,the culture was substituted with 10% FBS. After 24 h, cellswere harvested, total mRNA was extracted using TRIzol(Thermofisher) and reverse transcribed into cDNA usingPrimeScript RT reagent Kit (Takara). The real-time qPCR wasoperated using Eppendorf Mastercycler. To assess the genesilencing ability of polywraplex against the interference ofFBS, polywraplex (contained siRNA was 1 µg/well) were addedonto the wells and incubated in 10% FBS DMEM culture for4 h, and exchanged with fresh DMEM medium containing 10%FBS. After 24 h, cells were harvested and PCR reaction wasprocessed as previously described.2.10.In vivo distribution of polywraplexTo assess the distribution of systemic delivery of Cy5-siRNApolypwraplex required utilization of tumor models performedby inoculating U87MG cells to male BALB/c nude mice underthe right armpits skin (2 × 106 cells). When the tumor wasallowed to mature (volume 150–200 mm3 ), mice were dividedinto naked Cy5-labeled siRNA, Cy5-labeled siRNA polyplex,and Cy5-labeled siRNA polywraplex groups randomly. Eachof the groups was intravenously injected with dosage format the dose of 0.5 mg/Kg, respectively. After 24 h, the tissuesof mice were harvested and fluorescence image using IVISinstrument (PerkinElmer) was performed.2.11.Tumor suppression test in vivoTo evaluate the ability of tumor suppression in vivo, inoculatedU87MG cells were injected into the mice as previouslydescribed. When the tumor volume reached 150–200 mm3 ,mice were randomly divided into four groups (6 mice eachgroup): saline, naked anti-VEGFA siRNA, anti-VEGFA siRNApolyplex and anti-VEGFA siRNA polywraplex. The miceof each group were injected the dosage form at the doseof 0.5 mg/Kg, through the tail vein every 7 d The length(L) and the width (W) of the tumor were recorded duringthe period of experiment and the volume of tumor wascalculated (V = LW2 /2). At last, the tumors were harvested,weighed and photographed. Body weight of mice wasalso detected every 3 d, and survival curve was drawncorrespondingly.2.12.Evaluation of anti-angiogenetic efficacyThe anti-angiogenetic therapy efficacy of the polywraplex (thefour groups: saline, naked siRNA, polyplex and polywraplex)was measured by calculating the density of blood capillaries.The capillaries of tumor slides of each group were stainedwith rabbit anti-CD 31 antibodies.Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 356–364359Fig. 1 – Schematic diagram of the process of uni-molecular polyplex formulation, and the subsequent utilization as a core toobtain assembled polywraplex encapsulated by triblock copolymers.2.13.Statistical analysisThe data of each group collected were analyzed by two-wayt-test, using OriginPro 2017 software. The value of ** P < 0.01,*** P < 0.001 was considered as statistically significance (Fig. 1).3.Results and discussion3.1.Synthesis of network cationic polymer throughthermodynamically interlocked methodA thermodynamically interlocked method was utilizedto construct a network cationic polymer, which waspolymerized by condensing PAMAM and oligo-spermineimidazole-diimine through imine which was pH-responsiblein biological condition according to previously study [17]. Theoligo-spermine-imidazole-diimine was condensed by mixingimidazole-4,5- dicarbaldehyde and spermine in a mole ratio5/4 for 12 h. At the end of the reaction, the generation of Zetapotential around the network cationic polymer would prohibitadditional cationic materials from further polymerizing,giving rise to a thermodynamic interlocked method, followingwhich a network cationic polymer of the mean particlediameter of 408 nm was thermodynamically synthesized.Similarity of the structure to dendrimers, with increasing indiameter, the molecular weight (MW) doubles, the MWof PAMAM dendrimer 6 generation was 58048 Dalton anddiameter was 6.7 nm, the MW of network cationic polymerwas high, approximately tens of millions Dalton and couldn’tbe detected accurately using the molecular weight analysismethod, size-exclusion chromatography. The H-NMR of thenetwork cationic polymer (DMSO-d6, ppm): 8.45-8.38 (m,360Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 356–364Fig. 2 – The structure characterization of the networked cationic polymer, polyplex and polywraplex. (A) 1H-NMR ofnetworked cationic polymer; (B) Image of agarose electrophoresis of polyplex in a series of the mass ratio ofsiRNA/networked cationic polymer; (C) Particle size and zeta potential of polyplex upon addition of siRNA into thenetworked cationic polymer; (D) Change of particle size and zeta potential during formulating polywraplex.=NH-), 8.06-7.73 (m, Ar-H), 3.56-2.16 (m, -CH2-CH2-), is asshown in Fig. 2A.3.2.Formation and characterization of polyplex andpolywraplexAs shown in Fig. 2B, the image of the electrophoresis indicatedthat cationic polymer could condense the siRNA completely,when mass ratios of network cationic polymer/siRNA weremore than 1:1. As shown in Fig. 2C, the particle shrank fromits maximum size at 408 to 81 nm as siRNA was graduallydropping to the polymer solution in the mass ratio from1/20 to 1/5. Then the diameter regained to near 200 nmafter continuously adding siRNA. The shrinkage of particleswas attributed to the siRNA encapsulated into the cationicpolymer by the electrostatic forces. When a charged particlecollapsed to a smaller size due to neutralization or partialneutralization, the oppositely charged species must be locatedinside the particle. After that, upon further addition of siRNA,the particle gradually rebounded to near 200 nm, which wasinitiated by the condensation ability of the cationic polymerbeing saturated, no further the siRNA could enter into them.Meanwhile, the decrease of zeta potential gradually deprivedstability of the individual particles in solution, inducing theinter-particulate condensation.The core of polywraplex was constructed using polyplex(wcationic polymer /wsiRNA = 7/1), since the mRNA expressionsuppression of polyplex was optimum in the mass ratio at7/1 shown in Fig. 5B and the diameter was about 100 nmshown in Fig. 2C which was prone to enhanced permeabilityand retention (EPR) effect [19]. The mass ratio of triblockcopolymer/cationic polymer (w/w = 12/1) was used to surfacelayer of formulated polywraplex because that the surfaceof particle presented neutralization shown zeta potentialdecreased to 0 mV in Fig. 2D. The decreased reason of zetapotential was due to the surface positive charge of polyplexneutralized by excessive negative charged triblock copolymer,according to previous studies in this project [18].As the image of TEM shown in Fig. 3A, the networkedcationic polymer was connected with the black crosslinkingjunction on the TEM photograph, indicating that thewhole polymers were consisted of branched PAMAM G6and the linear oligo-spermine-imidazole-4,5-diimine toform networked structure. As shown in Fig. 3B, the imagedemonstrated that the polyplexes in the mass ratio of 7/1could condense the siRNA effectively. Under the 0.5 µm scale,polyplexes were well-formed, spherical with a particle sizeof about 100 nm. The TEM image of polywraplexes showedthat morphology of the particle was near sphere and the sizeat about 200 nm larger than polyplexes, as shown in Fig. 3C.both of the particles sizes were less smaller than DLS datashown in Fig. 2C and 2D since DLS detects the hydrodynamicsize of particle which is swollen in water condition comparedto the dried state of TEM sample, meanwhile, the asymmetricsurface monolayer of polywraplex with low electronic densitywas not clearly visible by TEM.3.3.Serum stability of polyplex and polywraplexAs shown in Fig. 4A. the image of the electrophoresis agarosegel demonstrated that the degradation time of the siRNAin polyplex is consistency with Naked siRNA was about6 h, for positive polyplexes are believed to induce stronginteraction with the compositions in the FBS for which maylose the ability to protect the siRNA [18]. When siRNA amidpolywraplex, it could be detected until 48 h since the surfacetri-block copolymer membrane could play the role of guardianto avoid degrading in serum.3.4.Determination of intracellular uptake efficiency ofpolyplex and polywraplex in U87MG cells using flowcytometryThe intracellular uptake efficiency of the polyplexes andpolywraplexes in U87MG cells was measured using flowcytometry. As shown in Fig. 4B, the uptake efficiency ofAsian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 356–364361Fig. 3 – (A) TEM image present the deep color parts were the networked structure of the cationic polymer, and light partswere many hollow among the polymer. The black spots in the TEM were (B) polyplex (wcationic polymer /wsiRNA = 7/1) and (C)polywraplex (wtriblock copolymer /wcationic polymer = 12/1) which were polyplex encapsulated by triblock copolymer.Fig. 4 – (A) Serum stability assay in agarose gel shows polywraplex could protect the siRNA efficiently in 50% FBS during48 h compared to polyplex group. Cellular uptake efficiency of polyplex and polywraplex formulated with Cy3-siRNA asdelivered into U87MG cells using Flow Cytometer: (B) Cellular uptake efficiency of polyplex in DMEM medium without FBS.Naked siRNA group was considered as the negative control group and PEI 25 K was as a positive group, respectively; (C)Cellular uptake efficiency of polywraplex in DMEM medium with 10% FBS. (D) Confocal images presented the intracellulardistribution of polywraplex in 10% FBS medium.polyplexes in different mass ratios from 7/1 to 15/1 wasalmost the same with PEI 25 K group, which was the goldstandard of gene non-viral vector but owned high cytotoxicity.When FBS excised in the medium shown in Fig. 4C, the uptakeefficiency of polyplex was lower than polywraplex. The nearly30 eV cationic charges of the naked polyplexes were believedto induce strong interaction with the proteins in the FBS forwhich may compromise the polyplexes to interact with thetarget cells. In the case of polywraplexes, since the surfacecharges were neutralized/covered by the tri-block copolymermembrane, the particles had better accessibility with thetarget cells.3.5.Intracellular distribution of the polyplex andpolywraplex using CLSMThe intracellular distribution of the polyplex and thepolywraplex was measured using CLSM. As shown in Fig. 4D,the red dots (Cy3-labeled siRNA polyplex) can overlap with thegreen dots (LysoTrack Green- labeled lysosomes) indicatingthat polyplexes were successfully uptaken by the U87MGcells in the FBS free medium. At the same time, polywraplexcould transfect siRNA more effectively than polyplex in theFBS 10% medium. The Cy3-labeled siRNAs were presented inthe cytoplasm, which was the destination for them to playthe role of silence instead of cell nucleus. The results indicatethat the polywraplex can protect siRNA from degrading andcan effectively take siRNA into the cytoplasm. These resultswere consistent with the data of cellular uptake experiment.3.6.Cytotoxicity of the network cationic polymerAs shown in Fig. 5A, cytotoxicity of the network cationicpolymer was tested through the viability of U87MG cellstreated with a serious concentration of the polymers. WhilePEI 25 K was as positive control, the viability of the networkedcationic polymer was higher than PEI 25 K in U87MG cellsin concentration from 20 to 300 µg/ml. The differentiation ofcytotoxicity of two polymers may be due to the componentsof the cationic polymer which was linked with pH-sensitive362Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 356–364Fig. 5 – (A) viability of U87MG cells treated with the networked cationic polymer; (B) gene knockdown efficiency of polyplexin FBS free DMEM medium (contained siRNA was 1 µg/well); (C) gene knockdown efficiency of polywraplex in DMEMmedium with FBS 10% (contained siRNA was 1 µg/well); (D) the NIR image of tissue distribution in tumor-bearing nude miceadministrated systemically after 24 h of each group: (a) naked siRNA, (b) Cy5-siRNA polyplex and (c) Cy5-siRNA polywraplex.chemical bonds relative to the PEI which was linked morestably in low pH environments [5].3.7.Determination of VEGFA gene silencing of polyplexand polywraplex in U87MG cells using qPCRWhen polyplexes formed in a series of mass ratio wereused to transfect vascular endothelial growth factor Asilence siRNA(anti-VEGFA siRNA) into U87 MG cells, theone (wcationic polymer /wsiRNA = 7//1) showed the higher silenceability at lower mass ratio than the other groups in FBS freemedium shown in Fig. 5B. So this mass ratio was selectedto construct the next step formulation (polywraplex). In the10% FBS medium, polywraplex demonstrated more efficientlysilencing effect compared to other groups, as shown inFig. 5C. The results indicated that the polywraplex coatedwith surface triblock copolymer could prevent siRNA fromdegrading and transfect the gene into the U87MG cells, whichwere consistent with intracellular uptake and distributionexperiment.3.8.Distribution of Cy5-labeled siRNA in vivoEach of siRNA formulation demonstrated different organtargeted affinity shown in Fig. 5D. Naked siRNA was prone toaccumulating and clearing in kidney since its particle size lessthan 10 nm could pass the glomerular filtration. The cationicpolyplex mainly accumulated in liver for its particle sizeabout 100 nm according to EPR effect. The polywraplex groupshowed the most fluorescent intensity in tumor than theother groups, because that its neutralized and PEG-stabilizedsurface were facilitated to be trapped by tumor according toEPR effect.3.9.In vivo tumor suppressionAs shown in Fig. 6A, polywraplex group demonstratedsignificant difference compared to saline group and NakedsiRNA group, owning the largest reduction in volume of thetumor. The body weight curve of mice in Fig. 6B shows that thedifferentiation of each group is not significant and no micedied during the experiment. As shown in Fig. 6C and 6D, boththe weight and images of tumors from polywraplex groupshowed the lowest volume in all experiment groups, whichindicated that the polywraplex siRNA system can efficientlydeliver the siRNA to the tumor tissues. The average tumorrelative weights for the four experiment groups were 100%,91%, 67%, and 39%, respectively, shown in Fig. 6C. The resultsindicated that polywraplex with triblock surface membranecould more efficiently deliver to tumor, which was consistentwith siRNA distribution experiment in vivo.3.10.Evaluation of anti-angiogenetic efficacyThe anti-angiogenetic efficacy of polywraplex loading antiVEGF siRNA was evaluated by calculating the nascentcapillary density. As shown in Fig. 7A, the microscopic imagesof tumor slides, which stained with CD-31 antibody form eachgroup of mice receiving the four dosage forms, respectivelythe capillary densities decreased significantly in polywraplexgroup, compared to saline, naked siRNA and polyplex groups.The average capillary densities of tumor slides for the fourgroups were 169, 161, 101 and 47 spots/slides respectively,which were equivalent to 100%, 95%, 59% and 27% as shownin Fig. 7B. The results are more remarkable than the order oftumor weight experiment shown in Fig. 6C. Anti-VEGFA siRNAdirectly inhibits tumor angiogenesis, consequently, lead to Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 356–364363Fig. 6 – Results of Anti-tumor effect of U87MG tumor-bearing nude mice in vivo (Injection dosage of each mouse was0.5 mg/Kg/time). (A) Growth volume curves of xenograft tumor; (B) Body weight and survival curves of mice; (C) Relativetumor weight data and (D) photos of U87 MG tumors of each group: (a) saline, (b) naked siRNA, (c) polyplex, (d) polywraplex.mean±SD (n = 6).Fig. 7 – (A) Images of tumor sections stained by CD 31 antibody from four experiment group: (a) saline, (b) naked siRNA, (c)polyplex, (d) polywraplex and (B) quantification of capillaries of tumor. mean±SD (n = 5). ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001.a decrease of tumor weight and volume, which induced thedifferentiation between capillary density and tumor weightexperiment.4.Conflict of interestThe authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors aloneare responsible for the content and writing of this article.ConclusionIn constructing size-customizable uni-molecular polyplex,replacing the low molecular weight branched PEI withdendrimers as the crosslinking junctions of the networkedcationic polymer may offer a better-defined structureand electron microscopic visibility without changing thechemistry. The Zeta potential-regulated polymerization selfterminated at pre-determined size; the formed networkedcationic polymer packed siRNA intramolecularly to form auni-molecular polyplex; and the cationic particle adsorbedrationally designed tri-block copolymer to form a monolayer.Biologic assays comprising poly-electrolytes induced siRNAleaking, enzymatic degradation, and gene silencing activity(in vitro and in vivo) confirmed the functional similarity of thisdelivery carrier to that with PEI as the polymer crosslinkingjunctions. The polywraplexes using dendrimer as the cationicpolymer crosslinkers may serve a useful model to feedbackthe construction processes of synthetic carriers, and alow generation dendrimer cationic polymer may serve asformulation component.AcknowledgmentsThese authors G.B. performed the research; G.B. and T.X.drafted the manuscript; F.W. conceived the research, designedthe experiments together with G.B. and T.J., U.K.C. revised themanuscript; J.F., XT.D. provided help in synthesis and animalexperiment. This study was financially supported by thegrant of the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant nos.81373352 and 81690262). The authors appreciate the generoushelp from the faculties of the Analytical Center of ShanghaiJiao Tong University.Supplementary materialsSupplementary material associated with this article can befound, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ajps.2019.04.008.364Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 356–364references[1] Chen Y, Gao DY, Huang L. In vivo delivery of miRNAs forcancer therapy: challenges and strategies. Adv Drug DelivRev 2015;81:128–41.[2] Juliano RL. The delivery of therapeutic oligonucleotides.Nucleic Acids Res 2016;44(14):6518–48.[3] Li Z, Rana TM. Therapeutic targeting of microRNAs: currentstatus and future challenges. Nat Rev Drug Discov2014;13(8):622–38.[4] Pack DW, Hoffman AS, Pun S, Stayton PS. Design anddevelopment of polymers for gene delivery. Nat Rev DrugDiscov 2005;4(7):581–93.[5] Duan SY, Ge XM, Lu N, Wu F, Yuan WE, Jin T. Syntheticpolyspermine imidazole-4,5-amide as an efficient andcytotoxicity-free gene delivery system. Int J Nanomedicine2012;7:3813–22.[6] Santiago-Ortiz JL, Schaffer DV. Adeno-associated virus (AAV)vectors in cancer gene therapy. J Control Rel2016;240:287–301.[7] Liu Y, Siriwon N, Rohrs JA, Wang P. Generation of targetedAdeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors for human genetherapy. Curr Pharm Des 2015;21(22):3248–56.[8] Blessing D, Deglon N. Adeno-associated virus and lentivirusvectors: a refined toolkit for the central nervous system. CurrOpin Virol 2016;21:61–6.[9] Yin H, Kanasty RL, Eltoukhy AA, Vegas AJ, Dorkin JR,Anderson DG. Non-viral vectors for gene-based therapy. NatRev Genet 2014;15(8):541–55.[10] Slita A, Egoroua A, Casals E, Casalsa E, Kiselev A,Rosenholma JM. Characterization of modified mesoporoussilica nanoparticles as vectors for siRNA delivery. Asian JPharm Sci 2018;13(6):592–9.[11] Whitehead KA, Dorkin JR, Vegas AJ, Chang PH, Veiseh O,Matthews J, et al. Degradable lipid nanoparticles withpredictable in vivo siRNA delivery activity. Nat Commun2014;5:4277.[12] Lv H, Zhang S, Wang B, Cui S, Yan J. Toxicity of cationic lipidsand cationic polymers in gene delivery. J Control Rel2006;114(1):100–9.[13] Hong CA, Eltoukhy AA, Lee H, Langer R, Anderson DG,Nam YS. Dendrimeric siRNA for efficient gene silencing.Angew Chem Int Ed 2015;54(23):6740–4.[14] Liu J, Song L, Liu S, Zhao S, Jiang Q, Ding B. A tailored DNAnanoplatform for synergistic RNAi-/chemotherapy ofmultidrug-resistant tumors. Angew Chem Int Ed2018;57(47):15486–90.[15] Dowdy SF. Overcoming cellular barriers for RNAtherapeutics. Nat Biotechnol 2017;35(3):222–9.[16] Feng J, Chen S, Ge XM, Wu F, Bai G, Jin T. Precise assembly ofsynthetic carriers of siRNA through a series of interlockedthermodynamically self-regulated processes. Adv FunctMater 2018;28(6):1703207.[17] Duan S, Yuan W, Wu F, Jin T. Polyspermineimidazole-4,5-imine, a chemically dynamic and biologicallyresponsive carrier system for intracellular delivery of siRNA.Ange Chem Int Ed 2012;51(32):7938–41.[18] Ge XM, Duan SY, Wu F, Feng J, Zhu H, Jin T. Polywraplex,functionalized polyplexes by post-polyplexing assembly of arationally designed triblock copolymer membrane. AdvFunct Mater 2015;25(27):4352–63.[19] Maeda H, Wu J, Sawa T, Matsumura Y, Hori K. Tumorvascular permeability and the EPR effect in macromoleculartherapeutics: a review. J Control Rel 2000;65(1–2):271–84. Abstract Since the emergence of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) (formerly known asthe 2019 novel coronavirus [2019-nCoV]) in Wuhan, China in December 2019, which is causedby severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), more than 75,000 cases havebeen reported in 32 countries/regions, resulting in more than 2000 deaths worldwide. Despitethe fact that most COVID-19 cases and mortalities were reported in China, the WHO hasdeclared this outbreak as the sixth public health emergency of international concern. TheCOVID-19 can present as an asymptomatic carrier state, acute respiratory disease, and pneumonia. Adults represent the population with the highest infection rate. Journal of Microbiology, Immunology and Infection (2020) 53, 404e412Available online at www.sciencedirect.comScienceDirectjournal homepage: www.e-jmii.comReview ArticleAsymptomatic carrier state, acuterespiratory disease, and pneumonia due tosevere acute respiratory syndromecoronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2): Facts and mythsChih-Cheng Lai a, Yen Hung Liu b, Cheng-Yi Wang b,Ya-Hui Wang c, Shun-Chung Hsueh d, Muh-Yen Yen e,f,Wen-Chien Ko g, Po-Ren Hsueh h,i,*aDepartment of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Tainan Branch, Tainan,TaiwanbDepartment of Internal Medicine, Cardinal Tien Hospital and School of Medicine, College of Medicine,Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, TaiwancMedical Research Center, Cardinal Tien Hospital and School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Fu JenCatholic University, New Taipei City, TaiwandDepartment of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, TaiwaneSection of Infectious Diseases, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei, TaiwanfDepartment of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, TaiwangDepartment of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, TaiwanhDepartment of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan UniversityCollege of Medicine, Taipei, TaiwaniDepartment of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan UniversityCollege of Medicine, Taipei, TaiwanReceived 25 February 2020; accepted 25 February 2020Available online 4 March 2020KEYWORDSCoronavirus;2019-nCoV;SARS-CoV-2;COVID-19;Asymptomaticcarrier;Abstract Since the emergence of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) (formerly known asthe 2019 novel coronavirus [2019-nCoV]) in Wuhan, China in December 2019, which is causedby severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), more than 75,000 cases havebeen reported in 32 countries/regions, resulting in more than 2000 deaths worldwide. Despitethe fact that most COVID-19 cases and mortalities were reported in China, the WHO hasdeclared this outbreak as the sixth public health emergency of international concern. TheCOVID-19 can present as an asymptomatic carrier state, acute respiratory disease, and pneumonia. Adults represent the population with the highest infection rate; however, neonates,* Corresponding author. Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Number 7,Chung-Shan South Road, Taipei, 100, Taiwan.E-mail address: hsporen@ntu.edu.tw (P.-R. Hsueh).https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmii.2020.02.0121684-1182/Copyright ª 2020, Taiwan Society of Microbiology. Published by Elsevier Taiwan LLC. This is an open access article under the CCBY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2): facts and mythsAcute respiratorydisease;Wuhan pneumonia405children, and elderly patients can also be infected by SARS-CoV-2. In addition, nosocomialinfection of hospitalized patients and healthcare workers, and viral transmission from asymptomatic carriers are possible. The most common finding on chest imaging among patients withpneumonia was ground-glass opacity with bilateral involvement. Severe cases are more likelyto be older patients with underlying comorbidities compared to mild cases. Indeed, age anddisease severity may be correlated with the outcomes of COVID-19. To date, effective treatment is lacking; however, clinical trials investigating the efficacy of several agents, includingremdesivir and chloroquine, are underway in China. Currently, effective infection controlintervention is the only way to prevent the spread of SARS-CoV-2.Copyright ª 2020, Taiwan Society of Microbiology. Published by Elsevier Taiwan LLC. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).IntroductionIn December 2019, an outbreak of pneumonia due to unknown cause occurred in Wuhan, China and rapidly spreadthroughout the country within 1 month. The pathogen ofthis disease was confirmed as a novel coronavirus by molecular methods and was initially named as 2019 novelcoronavirus (2019-nCoV); however, the World Health Organization (WHO) announced a new name on February 11,2020 for the epidemic disease: Corona Virus Disease(COVID-19). To date, COVID-19 has affected people in morethan 28 countries/regions, including Taiwan, and hasbecome a global threat.1e4 In addition, the CoronavirusStudy Group of the International Committee on Taxonomyof Viruses has renamed the virus, which was provisionallynamed 2019-nCoV, as severe acute respiratory syndromecoronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) based on phylogeny, taxonomy,and established practice.5 Prior to this, on January 30,2020, the WHO declared the COVID-19 outbreak as the sixthpublic health emergency of international concern; therefore, this outbreak constitutes a public health risk throughthe international spread of disease and requires a coordinated international response. Increased dissemination ofinformation through use of the internet is associated withincreased transmission of information from all geographicalregions and across disciplines regarding recognition ofSARS-CoV-2 and COVID-196; nevertheless, important factorsassociated with COVID-19, specifically age and sex distribution, incubation period, clinical features, and optimaltreatment, remain uncertain. Therefore, herein, we performed a literature review, focusing on the epidemiologicalcharacteristics and clinical manifestations of COVID-19,including asymptomatic carrier state, acute respiratorydisease (ARD), and pneumonia.Severity of COVID-19COVID-19 was defined as the respiratory disease caused bySARS-CoV-2 that emerged in China in 2019 (https://www.who.int/westernpacific/emergencies/covid-19).Theclinical manifestations of COVID-19 are protean, whichinclude asymptomatic carrier, ARD, and pneumonia ofvarying degrees of severity. First, asymptomatic cases werediagnosed based on positive viral nucleic acid test results,but without any COVID-19 symptoms, such as fever,gastrointestinal, or respiratory symptoms, and no significant abnormalities on chest radiograph7,8 However, thetransmission of COVID-19 through asymptomatic carriers viaperson-to-person contact was observed in many reports.4,7,9,10 Second, patients with ARD defined aslaboratory-confirmed COVID-19 cases had respiratorysymptoms; however, chest computed tomography (CT) didnot reveal signs of pneumonia.11 Third, patients withpneumonia defined as COVID-19 cases had both respiratorysymptoms and pneumonia on chest radiograph. This category includes severe pneumonia e either respiratory rate30/minute, SpO2  93%, or PaO2/FiO2  300 mmHg, and acritical condition, characterized by respiratory failurerequiring mechanical ventilation, shock, or other organfailure requiring ICU management.8EpidemiologyAs of February 21, 2020, data from the WHO revealedaltogether 76,769 cases of COVID-19.1 Thirty-two countriesor regions have reported confirmed cases, including mainland China, Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR), Thailand, South Korea, Taiwan,Australia, Malaysia, Germany, Vietnam, the United States,Macao SAR, the United Arab Emirates, Canada, France, thePhilippines, the United Kingdom, Italy, India, Russia,Finland, Sweden, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Nepal, Spain,Belgium, Iran, Egypt, Israel, and Lebanon. In addition, 643cases were found in international conveyance e DiamondPrincess. China has the largest number of patients withCOVID-19 (n Z 75,543), followed by South Korea (n Z 204),Japan (n Z 93), and Singapore (n Z 85). To date, the reported number of deaths is 2247 and only 11 occurredoutside of mainland China, including two each in Hong KongSpecial administrative regions (SAR), Iran, and DiamondPrincess, and one each in Taiwan, South Korea, Japan,Philippines, and France. However, asymptomatic patientsor patients with mild COVID-19 symptoms may not seekhealth care, nor receive diagnosis, which leads to underestimation of the burden of COVID-19.Age and sexInitially, most reported COVID-19 cases in Wuhan wereadult patients; however, all of these cases had pneumonia.12e14 Their median or mean ages were 55.5, 49.0, and40656 years in three separate studies.12e14 A similar findingwas observed in two recent non-peer-reviewed studies: onestudy with 1099 patients from 552 hospitals in 31 provincesin China, in which the median age was 47.0 years, and55.1% of the patients were between the ages of 15e49years; and a second study that included 4021 confirmedcases in 30 provinces of China, in which the mean age was49 years and 50.7% of patients were between the ages of20e50 years.11,15 Both these studies included ARD andpneumonia cases.11,15 Similarly, the Novel CoronavirusPneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology Team inChina reported that 66.7% (n Z 29,798) of 44,672 cases ofCOVID-19 of varying degrees of severity were between 20and 60 years of age.8 In Korea, Ryu et al. found that theinitial 15 cases were aged between 25 and 62 years.16Regarding elderly patients infected with SARS-CoV-2, onestudy showed that 14.6% (6 in 41) of patients were aged 65years,13 while another study showed that 15.2% (15 in 99)patients were aged 70 years, among pneumonia cases.12In addition, two non-peer-reviewed studies showed only153 (15.1%) patients were elderly patients aged 65years,11 and 407 (10.1%) patients were aged >70 years.15According to the recent China CDC report,8 12.0%(n Z 5326) of patients were aged 70 years. Regardingchildren with COVID-19, nine (0.9%) patients aged 0e14years were found in only one study,11 while 14 (0.35%) patients were aged 10 years in another study.15 The largeststudy in China showed that 0.9% (n Z 416) of patients wereaged <10 years.8 Further, Wei et al. reported that nineinfants under 1 year of age were infected with SARS-CoV-2in China.8 Regarding patient sex ratio, male sex comprisedmore than half of the cases in most COVID-19 studies11e14and the proportion of males ranged from 51.4% to73.2%.8,11e14,16Initially, approximately half of the cases had Huananseafood market exposure and animal-to-human transmission was suspected.12,13 However, fewer cases hadexposure to this seafood market and an increasing numberof cases demonstrated human-to-human transmission.11,17Fortunately, no evidence was found for intrauterine infection caused by vertical transmission in women who contracted COVID-19 pneumonia in late pregnancy.18 Inaddition to family cluster infections due to human-tohuman transmission,19 nosocomial spread of SARS-CoV-2 isa serious concern. Indeed, one study in a Zhongnan hospitalof the Wuhan University showed 29.0% (n Z 40) weremedical staff and 12.3% (n Z 17) contracted COVID-19during hospitalization.14 Two other studies showed that2.1% (n Z 23) and 3.8% (n Z 1716) of patients were healthworkers.8,11Risk factorsAlthough the risk factors of COVID-19 remain unclear, manystudies reported that a significant proportion of patientshad underlying conditions.8,11e14 For patients with SARSCoV pneumonia, Chen et al. showed that 50.5% (n Z 51)of patients had chronic medical illness, namely cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases (40.4%).12 Among 1099patients with SARS-CoV-2 ARD, Guan et al. showed that23.2% (n Z 255) of patients had at least one coexistingC.-C. Lai et al.disorder, and hypertension was the most common underlying disease (14.9%), followed by diabetes mellitus(7.4%).11 Another large study on COVID-19 cases of varyingdegrees of severity also showed that hypertension was themost common underlying disease (n Z 2,683, 12.8%), followed by diabetes mellitus (n Z 1,102, 5.3%), and cardiovascular disease (n Z 873, 4.2%).8 Moreover, patients withsevere COVID-19 were more likely to have comorbiditiesthan those with non-severe diseases (37.6% vs. 20.5%,p < 0.001).11 A similar trend was observed in another studyof 138 hospitalized patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia, inwhich 46.4% (n Z 64) of patients had comorbidities and theintensive care unit (ICU) patients were more likely to haveunderlying diseases compared to non-ICU patients (72.2%vs. 37.3%, p < 0.001).14In summary, these studies disclosed several significantfindings. First, although most patients with COVID-19 weremiddle-aged adults, elderly patients and children alsocontracted COVID-19. Second, there is a higher prevalenceof men with COVID-19 than that of women; however,further studies are warranted to confirm this finding. Third,health care workers and hospitalized patients could beinfected by SARS-CoV-2 in the hospital setting. Finally, atleast 20% of COVID-19 cases had underlying diseases, andmore severe cases were more likely to have comorbiditiesthan non-severe cases.Incubation periodIt is essential to know the incubation period, the timeelapsing between the moment of exposure to an infectiousagent and the appearance of signs and symptoms of thedisease, for infection control and guidance for the durationof isolation. Initially, Li et al. used the data on exposureamong 10 confirmed cases in Wuhan to estimate the meanincubation period, which was 5.2 days (95% confidence interval [CI], 4.1e7.0); the 95th percentile of the distributionwas 12.5 days (95% CI, 9.2e18).20 One estimation based on125 patients with clearly defined exposure periods in Chinaindicated that the median incubation period was 4.75(interquartile range: 3.0e7.2) days.15 Using the travel history and symptom onset of 88 confirmed cases that weredetected outside of Wuhan in the early outbreak phase,Backer et al. estimated that the mean incubation periodwas 6.4 days (95% credible interval: 5.6e7.7), ranging from2.1 to 11.1 days (2.5th to 97.5th percentile).21 However,Guan et al., using a large sample for estimation, suggestedthat the median incubation period was only 3.0 days, butcould be as long as 24 days.11 Overall, these estimates willbe refined as more data become available. Detailedepidemiological information based on a larger sample ofpatients infected with COVID-19 is needed to determine theinfectious period of SARS-CoV-2, as well as to determinewhether transmission can occur from asymptomatic individuals during the incubation period.Clinical manifestationsPrevious reports revealed that there are asymptomaticpatients infected with SARS-CoV-2.7,8,22 These patients canspread the virus and may represent a population that canCoronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2): facts and myths407be easily neglected in epidemic prevention. Therefore, it isimportant to identify asymptomatic patients with COVID19. Since these patients are asymptomatic, careful monitoring of the natural course of the disease and contacthistory may only identify them. Based on the current data,we do not know whether these patients are only asymptomatic initially after contracting the disease or if they areasymptomatic throughout the course of the disease.Among a pooled analysis of 970 patients with ARD (Table1) based on two studies with detail clinical characteristics,11,23 males comprised more than half of the patientsand the mean age was 45 years. Hypertension was the mostTable 1 Demographic data, underlying medical conditions, clinical manifestations, and laboratory findings ofpatients with acute respiratory disease caused by SARS-CoV2.SexMaleFemaleAge, yearSmokingComorbiditiesHypertensionDiabetes mellitusCOPDChronic liver diseaseChronic kidney diseaseMalignancyPresentationFeverCoughMyalgia/fatigueHeadacheSputum productionSore throatChillsDiarrheaDyspneaNausea or vomitingWhite blood cell, 109/LNeutrophilLymphocyteTreatmentOxygen therapyVentilatorRenal replacement therapyECMOAntibiotic therapyAntiviral therapyOutcomeDischargedRemained hospitalizedDiedLiu et al.23(n Z 44)Guan et al.11(n Z 926)21 (47.7)23 (52.3)39.8 (17.1)2 (4.5)540 (58.3)386 (41.7)45.3 (17.3)120 (13.0)6 (13.6)2 (4.5)2 (4.5)NANANA123 (13.3)53 (5.7)6 (0.6)22 (2.4)5 (0.5)7 (0.8)43 (97.7)25 (56.8)23 (52.3)18 (40.9)16 (36.4)6 (13.6)6 (13.6)5 (11.4)4 (9.1)3 (6.8)4.2 (1.4)2.6 (1.1)1.1 (0.4)391 (42.2)622 (67.2)133 (14.4)124 (13.4)306 (33.0)130 (14.0)99 (10.7)31 (3.3)139 (15.0)43 (4.6)4.9 (1.6)NA1.1 (0.5)10 (22.7)0 (0.0)0 (0.0)0 (0.0)12 (27.3)23 (52.3)304 (32.8)0 (0.0)0 (0.0)0 (0.0)493 (53.2)313 (33.8)3 (6.8)41 (93.2)0 (0.0)50 (5.4)875 (94.5)1 (0.1)Data are n (%), n/N (%), and mean (SD).COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; NA, not available.common underlying disease, followed by diabetes mellitus.Approximately two-thirds of patients had cough, but only44.7% patients had fever. In addition, sputum productionwas observed in one-third of patients and sore throat wasfound in 14.0% of patients. Only fewer than 5% of patientshad gastrointestinal symptoms, such as diarrhea, nausea,and vomiting. Meanwhile, 32.4% of patients required oxygen therapy, but none required mechanical ventilation.Only one patient with ARD died and the mortality rate was0.1%.Among a pooled analysis of 468 patients with pneumonia(Table 2) based on five studies with detailed description ofclinical features of the disease,11e14,23 male sex comprised60.3% of patients and the mean age was 53 years. Approximately one-fifth of patients reported smoking history.Hypertension was the most common underlying disease(20.5%), followed by diabetes mellitus (14.4%). Additionally, 76.3% of patients had fever and 70.5% of patientspresented cough. Furthermore, dyspnea and sputum production were observed in approximately one-third of patients. Moreover, 8% and 6% of patients had nausea/vomiting or diarrhea, respectively. In all, 70.9% of patientsrequired oxygen therapy, and 28.8% required mechanicalventilation. Moreover, 5.1% and 3.1% of patients requiredrenal replacement therapy and extracorporeal membraneoxygenation, respectively. The overall mortality was 8.2%(n Z 37); however, 313 (66.9%) patients remainedhospitalized.Furthermore, patients with pneumonia were older, witha higher prevalence of smoking history, more underlyingdiseases, and were more likely to have fever, myalgia/fatigue, dyspnea, headache, and nausea/vomiting comparedto patients with ARD (all p < 0.05) (Table 3). In addition,pneumonia cases presented a higher white blood cell countand neutrophil count, but had a reduced leukocyte countcompared to ARD cases. Serum procalcitonin levels of0.5 ng/mL were found in 6.1% (6/99),12 7.7% (3/39),13 to13.7% (16/117),11 among SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia patientsreported from three studies.11e13 Moreover, patients withpneumonia were more likely to require oxygenation therapy, mechanical ventilator, renal replacement, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and received moreantibiotics and antiviral therapy than patients with ARD.Finally, pneumonia was associated with a higher mortalityrate than ARD (p < 0.0001).ImageBased on the findings of 1099 ARD cases of COVID, only14.7% (n Z 162) of patients had an abnormal chest radiograph.11 In contrast, 840 (76.4%) patients had abnormal anddiverse chest CT images, in which ground-glass opacity(GGO) was the most common abnormality (n Z 550, 65.5%),followed by local patchy shadowing (n Z 409, 48.7%), andinterstitial abnormalities (n Z 143, 17.0%). In addition, 505(50.1%) had bilateral involvement.11 The predominance ofGGO and bilateral involvement in chest CT is consistentwith previous studies.24e26 In contrast, other types of abnormalities, such as cavitation, pleural effusion, andlymphadenopathy, were not found.24,27 As the diseaseprogressed, follow-up CT showed enlargement and408C.-C. Lai et al.Table 2 Demographic data, underlying medical conditions, clinical manifestations, and laboratory findings of patients withpneumonia caused by SARS-CoV-2.SexMaleFemaleAge, yearSmokingComorbiditiesDiabetes mellitusHypertensionCOPDChronic kidney diseaseChronic liver diseaseMalignancyPresentationFeverCoughSore throatDyspneaMyalgia/fatigueSputum productionHeadacheDiarrheaNausea or vomitingWhite blood cell, 109/LNeutrophilLymphocyteTreatmentOxygen therapyVentilatorRenal replacement therapyECMOAntibiotic therapyAntiviral therapyOutcomeDischargedRemained hospitalizedDiedHuang et al.13(n Z 41)Chen et al.12(n Z 99)Wang et al.14(n Z 138)Liu et al.23(n Z 17)Guan et al.11(n Z 173)30 (73.2)11 (26.8)49.3 (13.0)3 (7.3)67 (67.7)32 (32.3)52.7 (46.7)NA75 (54.3)63 (45.7)55.3 (19.9)NA10 (58.8)7 (41.2)54.3 (29.9)2 (11.8)100 (57.8)73 (42.2)52.3 (19.2)38 (22.0)8 (19.5)6 (14.6)1 (2.4)NA1 (2.4)1 (2.4)NANA1 (1.0)NANA1 (1.0)14 (10.1)43 (31.2)4 (2.9)4 (2.9)NA10 (7.2)3 (17.6)6 (35.3)3 (17.6)NANANA28 (16.2)41 (23.7)6 (3.5)3 (1.7)1 (0.6)3 (1.7)40 (97.6)31 (75.6)NA22 (53.7)18 (43.9)11 (26.8)3 (7.3)1 (2.4)NA6.9 (4.9)5.7 (4.3)0.8 (0.4)82 (82.8)81 (81.8)5 (5.1)31 (31.3)11 (11.1)NA8 (8.1)2 (2.0)1 (1.0)7.5 (3.6)5.5 (3.7)0.9 (0.5)136 (98.6)82 (59.4)24 (17.4)43 (31.2)96 (69.6)37 (26.8)9 (6.5)14 (10.1)19 (13.8)4.7 (2.2)3.3 (2.2)0.8 (0.4)17 (100.0)14 (82.4)4 (23.5)6 (35.3)12 (70.6)11 (64.7)3 (17.6)1 (5.9)2 (11.8)4.6 (1.5)3.3 (2.0)0.9 (0.3)82 (47.4)122 (70.5)23 (13.3)65 (37.6)99 (57.2)61 (35.3)26 (15.0)10 (5.8)12 (6.9)4.3 (2.5)NA0.8 (0.3)27 (65.9)14 (34.1)3 (7.3)2 (4.9)41 (100.0)39 (95.1)75 (75.8)17 (17.2)9 (9.1)3 (3.0)70 (70.7)75 (75.8)106 (76.8)32 (23.2)2 (1.4)4 (2.9)NA124 (89.9)10 (58.8)5 (29.4)NANA14 (82.)11 (64.7)114 (65.9)67 (38.7)9 (5.2)5 (2.9)139 (80.3)80 (46.2)28 (68.3)7 (17.1)6 (14.6)31 (31.3)57 (57.6)11 (11.1)47 (34.1)85 (61.6)6 (4.3)0 (0.0)10 (58.)NA5 (2.9)154 (89.0)14 (8.1)Data are n (%), n/N (%), and mean (SD).COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; NA, not available.consolidation of single GGO, an enlarged fibrous stripe, andsolid nodules. In contrast, a small fibrous stripe, as well asthe resolution of GGO, may be associated with improvement in the patient’s condition.28,29TreatmentSeveral reports suggest the following as potential drugcandidates, although the clinical effectiveness of thesedrugs have not yet been evidenced for COVID-19: lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra), nucleoside analogs, neuraminidaseinhibitors, remdesivir, umifenovir (arbidol), DNA synthesisinhibitors (such as tenofovir disoproxil, and lamivudine),chloroquine, ACE2-based peptides, 3C-like protease(3CLpro) inhibitors, novel vinylsulfone protease inhibitor,teicoplanin, and Chinese traditional medicine (such asShuFengJieDu or Lianhuaqingwen capsules).30e39 Theeffectiveness of remdesivir is more evident in the literatureto date; indeed, it appears to be the most promising drugfor COVID-19. In fact, an in vitro study demonstrated thatthe 50% effective concentration (EC50) of remdesivir againstnCoV-2019/BetaCoV/Wuhan/WIV04/2019 in Vero E6 cellswas 0.77 mM, and the 90% effective concentration (EC90)was 1.76 mM.31 However, only one case in the US showed aclinical response to remdesivir, although the viral loadappeared to decline at the time of initiating remdesivir(cycle threshold from 18e20 to 23e24).33 Subsequently,two large clinical trials, NCT04252664 (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04252664)formild/moderateCOVID-19andNCT04257656(https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04257656)forsevereCoronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2): facts and myths409Table 3 Comparison among demographic data, underlyingmedical conditions, clinical manifestations, and laboratoryfindings of patients with acute respiratory disease andpneumonia caused by SARS-CoV-2.Acuterespiratorydisease,N Z 970SexMaleFemaleAge, yearsSmokingComorbiditiesHypertensionDiabetes mellitusChronic liverdiseaseCOPDChronic kidneydiseaseMalignancyPresentationFeverCoughSputumproductionMyalgia/fatigueDyspneaHeadacheSore throatNausea orvomitingDiarrheaWhite blood cell,109/LNeutrophilLymphocyteTreatmentOxygen therapyVentilatorRenalreplacementtherapyECMOAntibiotictherapyAntiviraltherapyOutcomeDischargedRemainedhospitalizedDied561 (57.8)409 (42.2)45.1 (17.3)122 (12.6)Pneumonia,N Z 468p value0.3824282 (60.3)186 (39.7)53.1 (27.6)<0.000143/231 (18.6) 0.0166129 (13.3) 96/369 (26.0) <0.000155 (5.7)53/369 (14.4) <0.000122/926 (2.4) 2/214 (0.9)0.28838 (0.8)15 (3.2)5/926 (0.5) 7/311 (2.3)0.00070.01437/926 (0.8) 15/451 (3.3)0.0004434 (44.7)647 (66.7)322 (33.2)357 (76.3)<0.0001330 (70.5)0.1467120/369 (32.5) 0.8143156 (16.1)143 (14.7)142 (14.6)136 (14.0)46 (4.7)236 (50.4)167 (35.7)49 (10.5)56/427 (13.1)34/427 (8.0)<0.0001<0.00010.02910.65060.017036 (3.7)4.9 (1.6)28 (6.0)5.3 (3.2)0.05030.01092.6 (1.1)/44 4.4 (3.3)/2951.1 (0.5)0.8 (0.4)<0.0001<0.0001314 (32.4)0 (0.0)0 (0.0)332 (70.9)135 (28.8)23/451 (5.1)<0.0001<0.0001<0.00010 (0.0)505 (52.1)14/451 (3.1) <0.0001264/330 (80.0) <0.0001336 (34.6)229 (48.9)<0.000153 (5.5)916 (94.4)111 (23.7)313 (66.5)<0.0001<0.00011 (0.1)37/451 (8.2)<0.0001Data are n (%), n/N (%), and mean (SD).COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; NA, not available.Bold indicates p < 0.05.COVID-18, were initiated in China, with an estimated enddate in early April 2020. In these two trials, the 10-dayregimen of remdesivir was 100 mg once daily for 9 daysafter the loading of 200 mg on day 1.34 Chloroquine isanother promising drug.35,36 An in vitro study on the timeof-addition assay in Vero E6 cells demonstrated that chloroquine functioned at both entry and at post-entry stagesof COVID-19, and the EC90 value of chloroquine against the2019-nCoV was 6.90 mM.31 In addition, passive immunizationtherapy and the use of interferon could theoretically behelpful, but to date there is no evidence to validate thishypothesis.Systemic corticosteroid was administered in 18.6%e44.9% patients in order to control the inflammatoryresponse caused by SARS-CoV-2 in 4 initial large studies.11e14 However, corticosteroid therapy could be associated with delayed MERS-CoV RNA clearance (adjustedhazard ratio, 0.35; 95% CI, 0.17e0.72; p Z 0.005) for critically ill patients with MERS,40 and early corticosteroidtreatment could be associated with higher subsequentplasma RNA load of SARS-CoV for adults with SARS.41Moreover, corticosteroid-associated psychosis and diabetes were observed in the treatment of SARS.42,43 Thus,clinical use of corticosteroids in the treatment of COVID-19was not recommended in the interim, unless indicated foranother reason.44,45OutcomesAccording to WHO reports, the overall mortality rate forCOVID-19 was 2.9% (2247 in 76,769),1 however, the mortality rate varied among studies. Initial studies reportedthat the mortality rate associated with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia ranged from 11%12 to 15%,13 but later studiesrevealed that the mortality rate was between 1.4%11 and4.3%.14 The differences in the results among differentstudies could be due to the study population, as well as thedifferences among the studies in terms of disease severity.In addition, these results need further clarification, since amajority of the reported mortality was all-cause mortality,not COVID-attributed mortality; also, the outcome measurement was incomplete because many patients remainedhospitalized before publication of the results.Several prognostic factors of COVID-19 were also reported in these studies. In one study using the MulBSTAscore system,46 which includes six indices, namely multilocular infiltration, lymphopenia, bacterial co-infection,smoking history, hypertension, and age, revealed thatthese indices were poor prognostic factors.12 Another studyshowed similar findings, and specifically the indicators ofdisease severity, including oxygenation, respiratory rate,leukocyte/lymphocyte count, and the chest imaging findings, were associated with a poor clinical outcome.11Moreover, a substantially elevated case-fatality rateincluded the following patient characteristics: male sex,60 years of age, baseline diagnosis of severe pneumonia,and delay in diagnosis.15 Similarly, the China CDC reportedthat patients aged 80 years had the highest case fatalityrate, 14.8%, among different age groups, and the case410fatality rate of patients in which disease severity wascritical was 49.0%.8 Together, these findings suggest thatold age and increased disease severity could predict a pooroutcome.In this stage of lack of effective drugs, the implementation of infection control interventions and trafficcontrol bundle to effectively limit droplet, contact, andfomite transmission is the only way to slow the spread ofthe SARS-CoV-2. These infection control interventionsinclude early identification of cases and their contacts,avoiding close contact with people with airway symptoms,appropriate hand washing, and enhanced standard infection prevention, and control practices in the healthcaresetting.47,48Uncertain issuesAlthough information on COVID-19 has increased rapidlysince the emergence of SARS-CoV-2, many issues remainunresolved. First, the clinical manifestation of COVID-19ranges from the asymptomatic carrier state to severepneumonia; however, most early reports only showed thefindings of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia, in which the ratio ofmale patients was much larger than that of female patients, there were no pediatric cases, and the mortalityrate was high.12e14 Subsequent to the publication of thestudies of patients with only ARD or mild pneumonia, wefound the ratio of male-to-female patients decreased,children or neonates could contract COVID-19, and themortality rate declined compared to that of previous reports.8,11 However, whether children were less susceptibleto SARS-CoV-2, or their presentation was mostly asymptomatic or difficult to detect, remains unclear.49 In addition, most studies, especially those with a large patientpopulation, were conducted in China, and the study ofasymptomatic carriers was limited. More studies areneeded to clarify the epidemiologic characteristics ofCOVID-19 and to identify the risk and prognostic factors ofpatients infected with SARS-CoV-2. Second, Zou et al. reported that the viral load detected in asymptomatic patients was similar to that found in symptomatic patients;however, the viral loads from patients with severe diseaseswere higher than those in patients with mild-to-moderatepresentations. Moreover, higher viral loads were detectedin the nose than in the throat.50 As there is a concern ofvirus spread due to severe cough induced by performing athroat swab, nasal swab may be a relatively safe and sensitive alternative to collect the respiratory specimen ofpatients with COVID-19. However, this study involved apopulation of only 18 patients, including one asymptomaticpatient.49 In addition, every test has its own limitation andsensitivity/specificity; however, the studies investigatingthe performance of current diagnostic methods of SARSCoV-2 among different COVID-19 populations, includingasymptomatic carriers, ARD, and pneumonia, are lacking.The false positive and negative rates of each diagnostic toolamong patients with COVID-19 presenting varying degreesof severity of the disease remain unknown. This type ofinformation is important for screening patients with COVID19 and to aid isolation and infection control strategies.Finally, since SARS-CoV-2 can be detected in theC.-C. Lai et al.asymptomatic individual, the prophylactic or pre-emptiveuse of effective anti-viral agents to reduce the viral loadand decrease the risk of virus spread from asymptomaticcarriers may help to control the spread of COVID-19.ConclusionsThis review provides updated information about COVID-19.SARS-CoV-2 can affect patients of all ages. COVID-19 canpresent as asymptomatic carriage, ARD, and pneumonia.Severe cases are more likely to be older and to haveincreased underlying comorbidities compared to mildcases. Age and disease severity can be correlated with theoutcomes of COVID-19. To date, effective treatment forSARS-CoV-2 is lacking; however, two trials investigating theclinical efficacy of remdesivir are underway in China.Currently, effective infection control intervention is theonly way to prevent the spread of SARS-CoV-2.Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 109 (2020) 2676-2683Contents lists available at ScienceDirectJournal of Pharmaceutical Sciencesjournal homepage: www.jpharmsci.orgDrug Discovery-Development InterfaceDeamidation in Moxetumomab Pasudotox Leading toConformational Change and Immunotoxin Activity LossXiaojun Lu, Shihua Lin, Niluka De Mel, Arun Parupudi, Jared Delmar, Madhu Pandey,Xiangyang Wang, Jihong Wang*Analytical Sciences, Biopharmaceutical Development, AstraZeneca, One MedImmune Way, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20878a r t i c l e i n f oa b s t r a c tArticle history:Received 16 February 2020Revised 14 May 2020Accepted 1 June 2020Available online 11 June 2020Asparagine (Asn) deamidation is a common posttranslational modi?cation in which Asn is converted toaspartic acid or isoaspartic acid. By introducing a negative charge, deamidation could potentially impactthe binding interface and biological activities of protein therapeutics. We identi?ed a deamidationvariant in moxetumomab pasudotox, an immunotoxin Fv fusion protein drug derived from a 38-kDatruncated Pseudomonas exotoxin A (PE38) for the treatment of hairy-cell leukemia. Although the deamidation site, Asn-358, was outside of the binding interface, the modi?cation had a signi?cant impact onthe biological activity of moxetumomab pasudotox. Surprisingly, the variant eluted earlier than its unmodi?ed form on anion exchange chromatography, which often leads to the conclusion that it has ahigher positive charge. Here we describe the characterization of the deamidation variant with differentialscanning calorimetry and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, which revealed that theAsn-358 deamidation caused the conformational changes in the catalytic domain of the PE38 region.These results provide an explanation for why the deamidation affected the biological activity of moxetumomab pasudotox and suggest the approach that can be used for process control to ensure productquality and process consistency.© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Pharmacists Association®. Thisis an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Keywords:Proteins structureProtein conformationProtein stabilityProtein foldingPosttranslational modi?cationMass spectrometryCalorimetryModelingDeamidationBiological activityHydrogen-deuterium exchangeIntroductionSince the approval of recombinant human insulin by the U.S.Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1982, the use of therapeuticproteins for the treatment of many diseases and disorders,including cancer, autoimmune and in?ammatory disorders, andmetabolic, cardiovascular, and infectious diseases, has growntremendously.1,2 Protein-based biopharmaceuticals often havehigher speci?city and therefore lower potential to cause adverseeffects and immune responses than small-molecule drugs, but theyalso present their own challenges.2 One of the most critical of theseCurrent address for Lu: Adimab, 7 Lucent Drive, Lebanon, NH 03766, USA.Current address for X. Wang and J. Wang: Viela Bio, One Medimmune Way, Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA.Disclosure of Potential Con?icts of Interest: This study was funded by AstraZeneca,United Kingdom. All authors are or were employees of AstraZeneca at the time thiswork was performed, with stock interests or options in AstraZeneca.* Corresponding author.E-mail address: WangJh@VielaBio.com (J. Wang).challenges is the chemical degradation that may occur during themanufacturing and storage of most therapeutic proteins, whichleads to one or more posttranslational modi?cations (PTMs).2,3Asparagine (Asn) deamidation, one of most common nonenzymatic PTMs, has long been considered to be a major degradationpathway for many monoclonal antibodies and other therapeuticproteins.4 It is generally believed that under neutral and basicconditions, the reaction goes through a ?ve-membered cyclic succinimide intermediate, which then hydrolyzes and yields bothisoaspartic acid and aspartic acid (Asp).5-7It has been reported that Asn deamidation could have a significant impact on the biological activity of therapeutic proteins. Forexample, in a study of dornase alpha, a recombinant enzyme usedfor the treatment of cystic ?brosis, deamidation of a single Asnresidue resulted in loss of its biological activity.8 Deamidation wasalso reported to compromise antibody colloidal stability and toincrease aggregation under low-pH conditions.9 Especially in lightof the relationship between protein structure and function, detailedstructural characterization is essential to understand the molecularbasis of such reactions.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xphs.2020.06.0020022-3549/© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Pharmacists Association®. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).X. Lu et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 109 (2020) 2676-2683Hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX) mass spectrometry (MS)has emerged as a useful tool to monitor the conformation anddynamics of therapeutic proteins.10-13 Conventional biophysicaltechniques such as circular dichroism and ?uorescence14-16 provideonly general information, and it is dif?cult to detect subtleconformational changes or changes related only to speci?c regionsof proteins with these techniques. In contrast, HDX-MS can be usedto detect and localize the impact of PTMs on the structure of proteins at the peptide level, or even at the residue level. For example,HDX has been used to study Asp isomerization and methionineoxidation in complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) of antibodies. Although they are only one amino acid apart in sequence,these two modi?cations have been found to result in opposingconformational impacts on local and nearby regions, leadingdirectly to different alterations on antibody-antigen binding af?nity.17 It has also been reported that oxidation of a CDR tryptophanresidue signi?cantly reduces antigen binding af?nity, and HDX-MSdata have revealed that the modi?cations increase the ?exibility ofvariable regions and disrupt local conformation.18 Although asimilar experiment with Asn deamidation revealed no measurablelocal conformational changes caused by the modi?cation, this?nding may have been compromised by the low deamidation levels(~30%) in the material used in the study.19A few studies have explored how Asn deamidation affects thethree-dimensional structure of proteins.20-25 Deamidation of human norovirus capsid protein has been reported to attenuate glycanbinding, and HDX-MS data have revealed localized alterations inprotein ?exibility, supporting ?ndings from nuclear magneticresonance and X-ray crystallography studies.26 In another HDX-MSstudy, deamidation was reported to slow Curli amyloid-proteinaggregation.11Moxetumomab pasudotox (formerly CAT-8015) is a recombinant immunotoxin therapeutic protein developed for the treatmentof B-cell malignancies27 that received FDA approval in September2018 for the treatment of adults with relapsed or refractory hairycell leukemia who have received at least two prior systemic therapies, including treatment with a purine nucleoside analog.28,29 It iscomposed of a 38-kDa truncated Pseudomonas exotoxin A (PE38)that is genetically fused to the variable fragment (Fv) of an antiCD22 antibody. When bound to CD22, a B-lymphocyteespeci?ccell surface protein, it is rapidly internalized and processed. ThePseudomonas exotoxin (PE) catalyzes the transfer of ADP ribosefrom nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) to eukaryoticelongation factor 2 (eEF2), which inhibits protein translation andleads to cell death. Deamidation in the catalytic domain of PE38 atAsn-358 has previously demonstrated signi?cantly reduced biological activity in cell-based bioassay,30 but it remains unclear howa single residue modi?cation could have such a marked impact onthe cytotoxicity of the molecule. Another puzzling observation isthat the deamidated species eluted before the major product peakon a positively charged anion exchange column, despite the factthat Asn deamidation introduces an extra negative charge.In this work, Asn-358edeamidated moxetumomab pasudotoxwas ?rst isolated using ion exchange chromatography (IEC). Thestructural impact of deamidation was carefully examined by bothdifferential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and HDX-MS, whichshowed alteration of the conformation of the PE catalytic domain.In the comprehensive functional studies described here, we gaineda deep understanding of why the single deamidation diminishedbiological activity and appeared as a basic variant, an early elutionpeak in anion exchange chromatography. After evaluation of theresults from our stability study and the refolding process, a controlstrategy was established and implemented in the commercialmanufacture process to minimize the deamidation level and tomaintain process and product consistency.2677Fig. 1. IEC fractionation of moxetumomab pasudotox. IEC pro?les of (a) starting material, (b) pre-peak fraction, and (c) main peak fraction.Materials and MethodsMoxetumomab PasudotoxRecombinant moxetumomab pasudotox used in this study wasexpressed in Escherichia coli strains and was puri?ed at AstraZeneca(Gaithersburg, MD) as previously described.31 All other commercialchemicals were reagent grade or better. Peptide mapping and cellbased bioassay methods were employed as previously described.30IEC FractionationIEC fractionation was performed on a 1200 HPLC systemequipped with a PL-SAX strong anion exchange column(4.6  50 mm, 8 mm, 1000 Å; Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). Mobile phaseA was composed of 10 mM Tris and 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, pH 8.0, and mobile phase B was composed of 10 mMTris, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, and 0.5 M NaCl, pH 8.0.For each experiment, 500 mL of moxetumomab pasudotox startingmaterial at a concentration of 1 mg/mL was loaded on the systemand eluted with a linear gradient of up to 80% mobile phase B at a?ow rate of 1.0 mL/min. The eluted protein was monitored by ultraviolet absorbance at 280 nm, and two fractions (pre-peak andmain peak) were collected with a fraction collector. The fractionsfrom multiple injections were pooled together and bufferexchanged with 25 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.4, to a ?nal2678X. Lu et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 109 (2020) 2676-2683three-dimensional structures of PE38 were drawn based on thestructure 1IKQ from the Protein Data Bank.CD22 Binding AssayFig. 2. DSC thermograms of IEC pre-peak (deamidated product) and main peak(original protein) fractions. Cp ¼ heat capacity; Tm ¼ melting temperature.concentration of approximately 1 mg/mL. The purity of IEC fractionation was veri?ed by injecting 25 mg of starting material and5 mg of each fraction on the anion exchange column.A surface plasmon resonanceebased characterization assay wasused to measure the kinetic binding af?nity (equilibrium dissociation constant [KD]) of moxetumomab pasudotox for human CD22.An anti-his tagged antibody was immobilized to two ?ow cells of asensor chip, using a standard amine coupling procedure. A reference surface was created by omitting the capture of CD22 on one?ow cell. A dilution series of moxetumomab pasudotox was prepared and then injected in a serial-?ow fashion across the referencesurface and the CD22 surface, followed by regeneration of both ?owcells. The data were reference ?ow cell subtracted and bufferblanked and then ?t to a 1:1 binding model, using Biacore Evaluation software (Precision Antibody, Columbia, MD). This modelyields an association rate constant (ka) and a dissociation rateconstant (kd). The KD for the interaction between moxetumomabpasudotox and CD22 was determined by the equation KD ¼ kd/ka.Internalization AssayDifferential Scanning CalorimetryDSC experiments were performed with a Microcal VP-CapillaryDSC instrument (Malvern Instruments, Malvern, PA) at a concentration of approximately 1 mg/mL. A scan rate of 60  C per hour wasused with temperatures ranging from 20  C to 100  C. Results wereanalyzed with Origin 7.0 Microcal plug-in software (Malvern Instruments). Concentration-normalized data were ?tted to a nonetwo-state model with two peaks to calculate melting temperatureand calorimetric enthalpy of the individual domains after subtracting the heat capacity of the reference buffer.Kinetic imaging analysis was used to determine whether moxetumomab pasudotox IEC pre-peak material was internalized intoB-lymphoma cells. Moxetumomab pasudotox was conjugated withAlexa Fluor 647 (Thermo Fisher Scienti?c, Waltham, MA) and wasbound to Daudi cells. The internalization of moxetumomab pasudotox was monitored with confocal ?uorescence microscopy.Quantitative assessment of kinetic images of the cell membraneand cytoplasm over time demonstrated the internalization ofmoxetumomab pasudotox into the cytoplasm.ADP Ribosylation AssayHDX-MS AnalysisHDX-MS analysis was performed by using Waters HDX Technology (Waters, Milford, MA). Both IEC pre-peak and main peakfractions were concentrated to 4 mg/mL prior to the HDX experiment. Samples containing 2 mL each were diluted 10-fold witheither H2O buffer (25 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.4) or D2O buffer(25 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.4) at 25  C. After incubation for0 (undeuterated), 0.5, 1, 5, 10, 30, 60, and 120 min, the labeledsamples were quenched by adding 20 mL of ice-cold quench buffer[7.2 M guanidine, 500 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, pH 2.4] and were then further diluted with 120 mL of icecold 0.1% formic acid solution. Immediately, 50 mL of diluted samples was digested using an Enzymate Pepsin Column (5 mM,2.1  30 mm; Waters) at 20  C. The peptic fragments were collectedwith an Acquity BEH C18 VanGuard Pre-column (2.1  5 mm;Waters) and eluted into an Acquity BEH C18 column (1.7 mm,1.0  100 mm; Waters) at 0  C. Peptides separated on the columnwere analyzed with a Xevo G2-XS QToF mass spectrometer (Waters). Data analysis was performed as previously described,23 andAn ADP ribosylation assay was used to evaluate the ADP ribosylation activity of moxetumomab pasudotox in vitro. Moxetumomab pasudotox reference standard and test samples wereserially diluted in ultrapure nuclease-free water and incubatedwith an ADP ribosylation assay system containing eukaryotic eEF2,NADþ, luciferase mRNA, complete amino acids mixture, RNase inhibitor, and wheat germ extract in a 96-well plate for 2 h at ambienttemperature. After incubation, an equal volume of Steady GloLuciferase assay buffer and substrate (Promega, Madison, WI) wasadded to each well, and the plate was incubated at ambient temperature with gentle shaking for 30 min before the luminescencewas read on a plate reader. The amount of luminescence detected ineach well was directly proportional to the amount of translatedluciferase protein, which was inversely proportional to the amountof ADP ribosylation of eEF2 by moxetumomab pasudotox. The testsample would be considered active if inhibition of luciferase mRNAtranslation was similar to that in the moxetumomab pasudotoxreference standard. If there was no inhibition of luciferase mRNAtranslation, the sample would be inactive.Table 1DSC Melting Temperature and Enthalpy of the Pre-Peak (deamidated Product) and Main Peak (Original Protein) Fractions.SamplePre-peak (deamidated product)Main peak (original protein)Tm, melting temperature.First transitionSecond transitionTm ( C)Enthalpy (kcal)Tm ( C)Enthalpy (kcal)43.544.812213777.577.6186186X. Lu et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 109 (2020) 2676-26832679Fig. 3. HDX analysis of pre-peak (deamidate product) and main peak (original protein) fractions. (a) Deuterium uptake kinetic curves of selected peptides from the pre-peak(deamidate product) fraction and the main peak (original protein) fraction. Difference charts of (b) light chain and (c) heavy chain summarize the difference in deuterium uptake between the two fractions for all seven exchange time points: 0.5 min (orange), 1 min (red), 5 min (dark red), 10 min (cyan), 30 min (blue), 60 min (dark blue), and 120 min(black). The gray vertical bars represent the summed difference from all time points. Dashed lines mark ± 0.3 Da, the determined standard deviation for each exchange time point.Results and DiscussionSeparation and Identi?cation of Asn-358 Deamidated VariantIEC analysis of moxetumomab pasudotox starting material led toa two-peak pro?le, indicating the presence of two charge variants(Fig. 1a). The elution time of these variants (10.0 min and 12.5 min)were consistent with those in previous studies,21,30 so these two IECpeaks were termed “pre-peak” and “main peak.” Successfulenrichment of two variants was con?rmed (Fig. 1b and c), andsubsequent peptide mapping analysis revealed that the pre-peakfraction was mainly Asn-358 deamidated moxetumomab pasudotox (97.5%), whereas the main peak fraction contained only 9.6%deamidated Asn-358. Other deamidation site, Asn-243, showed nosigni?cant difference in deamidation levels between the two IECfractions. Non-reducing peptide mapping results showed the samedisul?de bond linkages for both pre-peak and main peak.DSC StudyAs a technology that can monitor the thermal unfolding transitions of a protein, DSC provided the ?rst insight on the structuralimpact of Asn-358 deamidation. DSC measurements of both thepre-peak and the main peak fractions showed two distinct transitions, the ?rst at ~44  C and the second at ~78  C (Fig. 2 andTable 1). Native trypsin digestion of moxetumomab pasudotox wasused to assign the ?rst peak to unfolding of the PE38 domains andthe second peak to the Fv domain (see Supplementary Figs. S1, S2,S3 and Table S1), which is consistent with previous ?ndings.32Comparison of the two DSC pro?les revealed that both fractionsshared similar melting transition points for the Fv domain, but thePE38 domain of the pre-peak fraction showed a decrease of 1.3  C inmelting temperature and a 15-kcal loss in enthalpy compared withthe main peak fraction. These results suggest that Asn-358 deamidation had no effect on Fv thermal stability but slightly destabilized the PE38 region, indicating the possible conformationchange in PE38.HDX-MS AnalysisTo further localize the conformational change caused by Asn-358deamidation, HDX-MS was employed to analyze the two IEC fractions. A total of 182 peptic peptides were identi?ed during the HDXdata processing, and the standard deviation for each exchange time2680X. Lu et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 109 (2020) 2676-2683Fig. 4. HDX heat map of PE38. Relative deuterium uptake differences between pre-peak (deamidated product) and main peak (original protein) fractions are shown in color alongthe sequence for all seven exchange time points: 0.5, 1, 5, 10, 30, 60, and 120 min.point was determined to be ±0.3 Dalton (Da). Among all identi?edpeptides, 14 were from the variable domain of the light chain (LC),resulting in 81% of the LC sequence coverage. Both fractions hadsuperimposable exchange kinetic curves for the peptide LC 37e47(Fig. 3a), indicating no conformational difference in this peptideregion. Similar results were also observed for the other 13 LC peptides. To gain a global view of the LC, the differences in deuteriumincorporation between the two fractions were calculated for all theLC peptides (Fig. 3b). It is clear that all these differences were smallerthan 0.3 Da and were insigni?cant, so it was concluded that therewas no structural difference between the two IEC fractions in the LC,which is consistent with similar DSC melting temperaturesobserved from the second thermal transition.The rest of the 168 peptides were identi?ed to provide 96%sequence coverage of the variable heavy and PE38 domains (VHPE38, also referred to as heavy chain [HC]), and their HDX-MS datawere more complex than those from the LC. First, consistent withthe LC, all peptides located in the Fv region (residues HC1e129)showed no difference between the two fractions; exchange kineticcurves of peptides HC52e69 are shown as an example in Fig. 3a.Second, most peptides in the PE38 region (residues HC130e476)showed no or only minor differences (0.3 Da) in deuterium uptake between the pre-peak and the main peak fractions, suggestingthat no signi?cant conformational difference was caused by Asn358 deamidation in most of the PE38 region. Finally, obvious differences were observed for peptides associated with four regionsFig. 5. Crystalline structure of PE (PDB 1IKQ). (a) HDX heat map of 0.5-min exchange time point; (b) binding interface of eEF2 (magenta)33 and NAD (green).34 The deamidation siteis shown in orange.X. Lu et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 109 (2020) 2676-26832681Table 2Summary of Deamidated Product (IEC Pre-Peak) Biological Characterization.MethodPurposeCD22 binding assayInternalization assayADP ribosylation assayApoptosis bioassayMeasureMeasureMeasureMeasureResultsbinding af?nity to CD22cellular internalizationADP ribosylation activitycell-killing activity (relative potency)kD ¼ 1.39 nM for deamidated product kD ¼ 1.38 nM for original proteinInternalization observedInactiveInactivePlausible Mechanism for Biological Activity Loss(HC270e280, HC301e315, HC334e362, and HC428e455). Thepeptides in regions HC267e275, HC301e307, HC341e361, andHC428e454 all exhibited higher deuterium uptake in the pre-peakfraction than in the main peak fraction (Fig. 3a), and all otherpeptides related to these regions showed similar differences(Fig. 3c). The differences at many exchange time points weregreater than 0.3 Da, and a few were as high as 2.5 Da. These resultsindicated that some local conformational changes led to less protection against deuterium exchange in these regions.One limitation of the differences shown in Fig. 3c is that thepeptide length was not considered. Longer peptides sometimesshow more signi?cant differences than short ones because they canaccumulate more backbone amide deuterium, and back-exchangecan easily overwhelm the exchange on shorter peptides. To takethe peptide length into account, the differences in deuterium uptake by PE38 peptides between the two fractions were divided bythe total number of the exchangeable amide hydrogens in eachpeptide, depicted as colors in the heat map (Fig. 4). This heat mapclearly highlights the four PE38 regions in which the pre-peakfraction showed signi?cantly higher deuterium uptake than themain peak fraction. Overall, the HDX data suggest that Asn-358deamidation had no impact on the Fv region but did change localconformation in four regions in PE38. Considering that these regions account for only ~24% of the total PE38 sequence, these dataare consistent with the 1.3  C difference in the DSC melting temperature in the ?rst transition.In addition, careful examination of the sequence revealed thatthese HDX-de?ned regions contained a total of ?ve arginine residues. Because the HDX data suggested that these regions gainedmore solvent accessibility due to the deamidation of Asn-358, thedeamidated moxetumomab pasudotox molecules might exposemore positive charges that overcome one negative charge fromAsn-358 deamidation. This would explain why the deamidatedspecies eluted before the unmodi?ed ones on a positively chargedanion exchange column.As a truncated form of PE, PE38 contains part of the expressionimprovement domain (domain Ib), the translocation domain(domain II), and the ADP ribosyltransferase enzyme domain(domain III) as shown in Supplementary Fig. S4 sequence alignmentof PE and PE38 domains. The ?nding that all four HDX-de?nedregions were in domain III suggested that the deamidation ofAsn-358 (Asn-495 in PE) led to the misfolding of the catalyticdomain and reduction of the biological activity of moxetumomabpasudotox. In a previous structural study of the complex eEF2-PE,eEF2 mainly bound to 486e493, 576e580, and Arg-412 of PE.33When the HDX heat map and these eEF2 binding interfaces weresuperimposed on the crystal structure of PE in our study (Fig. 5), itbecame obvious that the eEF2 binding interface completely overlapped with the four HDX-de?ned regions 270e280, 301e315,334e362, and 428e455 (407e417, 438e452, 471e499, and565e592 in PE, see Supplementary Fig. S4 for sequence alignmentof PE and PE38). Furthermore, ?ve of nine residues that constructedthe NAD binding interface were also located in these HDX-de?nedregions (Fig. 5b).34 All of these results suggest that the conformational changes resulting from Asn-358 deamidation disruptedbinding of moxetumomab pasudotox to eEF2 and NAD, which led toloss of PE38-mediated cell-killing biological activity.This proposed mechanism is supported by observations fromfurther biological characterization of the IEC pre-peak fraction(Table 2). The target binding results indicate that the IEC pre-peakmaterial is capable of binding to the soluble CD22 with an af?nitysimilar to that of the main peak, indicating that deamidation ofPE38 at residue Asn-358 does not have an impact on binding to theCD22. Kinetic imaging analysis was used to determine whether themoxetumomab pasudotox IEC pre-peak material was internalizedinto B-lymphoma cells. Quantitative assessment of kinetic imagesof the cell membrane and cytoplasm over time demonstrated theinternalization of moxetumomab pasudotox into the cytoplasm.Fig. 6. Dose-response curves of ADP ribosylation activity of IEC pre-peak (deamidatedproduct) and starting moxetumomab pasudotox. RLU ¼ Relative light unit.Fig. 7. Correlation of IEC pre-peak (deamidated product) ratio to relative potency ofmoxetumomab pasudotox.2682X. Lu et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 109 (2020) 2676-2683The IEC pre-peak material was internalized into the cells with kinetics similar to those of the moxetumomab pasudotox startingmaterial (Supplementary Fig. S5). The ADP ribosylation activity ofmoxetumomab pasudotox was assessed by using an in vitro luciferase translation assay. No inhibition of the luciferase mRNAtranslation was observed for IEC pre-peak material, whereas themoxetumomab pasudotox starting material inhibited the luciferasemRNA translation in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 6). These results suggest that the IEC pre-peak material had dramaticallydecreased activity to induce the ADP ribosylation of eEF2, as indicated by the changes on the catalyst domain of PE38, and thereforecaused the loss of cell-killing activity.The correlation of IEC pre-peak levels with relative potency byapoptosis bioassay were linearly plotted as described in a priorstudy,30 but the ratio of the percent increase in deamidation to thepercent decrease in relative potency was not 1:1. A spiking studywas therefore carried out in which various ratios of puri?ed IECpre-peak to main peak were tested for relative potency. The correlation between IEC pre-peak to potency was nonlinear (Fig. 7),indicating that the IEC pre-peak material was not only inactive butalso appeared to competitively inhibit the biological activity ofmoxetumomab pasudotox. The relationship between the IEC prepeak and relative potency can been expressed asy ¼ að1  xÞ  ð1  bxÞwhere x is percent pre-peak, y is percent relative potency, a is therelative potency of the pure main peak (percent pre-peak is 0), andb is the factor of competitive inhibition. In this case, b is approximately 0.55. With an understanding of the correlation betweenpre-peak and relative potency, an appropriate speci?cation can beset for the pre-peak to ensure drug ef?cacy and safety.Interestingly, the Asn-358 deamidation level did not changeduring the forced degradation study at high pH. The crystallinestructure of PE indicates that Asn-358 (Asn-495 in PE) is buried, soAsn-358 deamidation can occur only during the refolding step,when the molecule is exposed to high pH and denaturing conditions. The deamidated molecule folded incorrectly. With a clearunderstanding of the structural impact of the deamidation, processcontrol can be achieved by optimizing the refolding conditions andthe puri?cation process to consistently produce high-qualityproduct.ConclusionsIn this study, we report a conformational change caused by asingle Asn deamidation based on DSC and HDX-MS data. Our resultsprovide an explanation for how Asn-358 deamidation impacted thebiological activity of moxetumomab pasudotox and why the deamidated variant eluted as an early peak in anion exchange chromatography. Importantly, our results indicate that residue Asn-358is enveloped once the protein is folded and thus will not changeduring storage conditions. With a clear understanding of thestructure-function relationship, the level of Asn-358 deamidationvariant can be minimized and controlled consistently in the currentprocess for producing clinical and commercial supplies.AcknowledgmentsWe acknowledge Timothy Pabst and Thomas Linke for providingthe moxetumomab pasudotox material, LeeAnn Machiesky andErika Farmer for biological activity testing, and Irma Vainshtein forthe internalization assay. We thank Ben Niu and Xiaoyu Chen forreviewing and editing the manuscript. Editorial support was provided by Deborah Shuman. (All are employees of AstraZeneca). International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X 1 (2019) 100012Contents lists available at ScienceDirectInternational Journal of Pharmaceutics: Xjournal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/international-journal-of-pharmaceutics-xDevelopment of muco-adhesive orally disintegrating tablets containingtamarind gum-coated tea powders for oral careTRika Kiniwaa, Masaki Miyakeb, Shin-ichiro Kimuraa, Shigeru Itaia, Hiromu Kondoa,?Yasunori Iwaoa,aLaboratory of Pharmaceutical Engineering and Drug Delivery Science, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka, 52-1 Yada, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka 4228526, JapanbLaboratory of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka, 52-1 Yada, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka 422-8526, JapanA R T I C LE I N FOA B S T R A C TKeywords:Oral careOrally disintegrating tabletTea powderMicrowaveAdhesive propertyTamarind gumThe aim of this study was to design and evaluate muco-adhesive orally disintegrating tablets manufactured bymicrowave irradiation and containing polysaccharide. We prepared orally disintegrating tea tablets (ODTTs)containing a 1 w/w% mass fraction of one of ?ve polysaccharides (gum arabic, carrageenan, guar gum, tamarindgum, or pectin) and evaluated the swelling degree, tablet hardness, friability, disintegration time, and adhesiveproperties. All tablets had a swelling degree of about 1 mm, a hardness of over 13 N, and a friability degreeof < 1%. Tablets containing gum arabic and tamarind gum had disintegration times of 30 s or less and satis?edrequirements as orally disintegrating tablets. This could be attributed to their high void contents, which allowedfor water penetration. The adhesive properties and particle retention ratios were highest in ODTTs containingtamarind gum, which was thought to be caused by the rapid disintegration and high viscosity of the tamarindgum itself. When we investigated changing the mass fraction of tamarind gum, we found 1 w/w% was mostsuitable for rapid disintegration and high adhesiveness. The ODTTs containing 1 w/w% tamarind gum showedsigni?cant growth inhibition towards Streptococcus mutans. Therefore, microwave irradiation technology andaddition of tamarind gum could be used to manufacture muco-adhesive orally disintegrating tablets for oral care.1. IntroductionIn the modern era, the pneumonia death rate has been increasingwith population aging and super-aging societies (Miyashita andYamauchi, 2018). Over 90% of pneumonia deaths are of older adultsaged 65 years or older, and about 70% of older adults su?ering frompneumonia have aspiration pneumonia (Teramoto et al., 2008; Baineet al., 2001). Aspiration pneumonia is caused by bacteria or othercontaminants that enter the trachea because of decreased swallowingfunction (i.e., deglutition re?ex and cough re?ex) (Manabe et al.,2015), which is common in the older adult (Ebihara et al., 2016; Perryet al., 2001; Li et al., 2015). Therefore, it is important to keep the oralcavities of older adults clean to prevent aspiration pneumonia. In addition, e?ective oral care can prevent intraoral diseases (e.g., periodontal disease and dental caries) and systemic diseases such as angina,brain infarction, and diabetes that can be induced by intraoral disease.Oral care preparations can improve quality of life for older adults(Langmore et al., 1998; Teramoto et al., 2015), especially if the preparations are easily handled and can be taken even by bedridden patients.Methods used for oral care include tooth brushing, mouthwashes,and oral care supplements to control plaque derived from bacteria. Indental caries, some Streptococcus mutans (S. mutans) produce insolubleglucan, which various microorganisms adhere to and then generate acidand dissolve the tooth enamel (Leme et al., 2006; Forssten et al., 2010).To prevent dental caries, chlorhexidine has been used to decreaseplaque accumulation (Charles et al., 2004). However, some side e?ects,such as tooth coloration, tartar formation in gingival crevices, and tastedisorders, have been reported when it is used for more than 2 weeks.Consequently, it is best avoid long-term use of chlorhexidine wherepossible (James et al., 2017). As other candidates, polyphenols such astannins, catechin, quercetin, and anthocyanin, which are biologicalcomponents of certain plants and very safe, have been reported to inhibit the formation of glucosyltransferase and bio?lms involved in theAbbreviations: ECG, Epicatechin gallate; EGC, Epigallocatechin; EGCG, Epigallocatechin gallate; GCG, Gallocatechin gallate; ODTs, Orally disintegrating tablets;ODTTs, Orally disintegrating tea tablets; SEM, Scanning electron microscope?Corresponding author.E-mail address: yasuiwao@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp (Y. Iwao).https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpx.2019.100012Received 18 December 2018; Received in revised form 7 March 2019; Accepted 3 April 2019Available online 04 April 20192590-1567/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X 1 (2019) 100012R. Kiniwa, et al.ODTTs, we selected thermally stable polysaccharides (gum arabic,carrageenan, guar gum, tamarind gum, and pectin). We determined thee?ects of these polysaccharides on the muco-adhesive properties of thetablets for potential use as oral care preparations.production of insoluble glucan (Ferrazzano et al., 2009; Percival et al.,2006; Yamanaka-Okada et al., 2008). Polyphenols have not only antibacterial activity but also antioxidant and anti-in?ammatory activities(Almajano et al., 2008; Jalil and Ismail, 2008; Cavet et al., 2011). Indiseases in the oral cavity such as dental caries and periodontal disease,in?ammation occurs as a host immune response towards bacteria. Theuse of polyphenols with antioxidant and anti-in?ammatory activitiescan reduce in?ammation caused by oral bacteria and keep the inside ofthe mouth clean. Tea leaves contain many compounds with antimicrobial, antioxidant, and anti-in?ammatory activities, and are acandidate for preparation of oral care products (Graham, 1992).We recently developed a novel method for facile preparation oforally disintegrating tablets (ODTs) by microwave irradiation of wetmolded tablets containing mannitol, sugar alcohol, a polymeric disintegrant, and water absorbent materials (Sano et al., 2011; Sano et al.,2013; Sano et al., 2014). ODTs are designed to dissolve in a smallamount of water in the oral cavity to enable patients with dysphagia orrestricted water intake to swallow tablets. They represent one of themost patient-friendly dosage forms (Wade et al., 2012; P?ster andGhosh, 2005). In our methodology, the microwave irradiation led to theformation of water vapor, which resulted in the expansion of the poresinside the tablets and the formation of new void networks. These newvoid networks allowed for the water to penetrate into the tablet moree?ciently and resulted in a decrease in their disintegration time. Inaddition, the formation of water vapor during the microwave irradiation also led to the dissolution/precipitation of some of the mannitolparticles, which resulted in the formation of new solid bridges. Theformation of new solid bridges between the mannitol particles led to anincrease in the hardness of the tablets. Taken together, this new methodtherefore makes it possible to prepare ODTs with opposing physicochemical properties such as rapid disintegration time and enhancedhardness. In addition, we developed orally disintegrating tea tablets(ODTTs) containing powdered tea leaves. These ODTTs disintegratedwithin the oral cavity within 30 s (Tanaka et al., 2016). In a preliminaryevaluation of antibacterial activity against S. mutans, an ODTT extractgreatly inhibited bacterial growth compared with arti?cial saliva. Asthe disintegrated particles are kept in the oral cavity for a long time, theantimicrobial action is sustained, and this should increase the therapeutic e?ect for oral care. If we could give ODTTs muco-adhesiveproperties, the powdered tea that disintegrates in the oral cavity wouldadhere to the oral mucosa and exhibit sustained antibacterial actionagainst oral microbial ?ora and provide e?cient oral care (Fig. 1).In the present study, we tried to make muco-adhesive orally disintegrating tea tablets by adding polysaccharides. Polysaccharides contain many connected monosaccharides and have di?erent types ofbonding and molecular weights (Wüstenberg, 2015). Polysaccharidescontain hydroxyl and carboxyl groups, and their thickening or gellingaction is determined by the type and concentration of these groups(Dickinson, 2003). They are used in a wide range of applications infoods, cosmetics, oral care products, and medicines (Avachat et al.,2011; Nayak et al., 2014; Datta and Bandyopadhyay, 2006). Mucin, themain component of oral mucosa, reportedly strengthens interactionswith hydrogen bond donors in the solute, and polysaccharides containing many hydroxyl and carboxyl groups interact with mucin (Caronet al., 2015). This allows powdered tea to attach to the oral cavity viapolysaccharides. Because we used microwave irradiation to prepare the2. Materials and methods2.1. MaterialsOolong tea leaves (Utonrousousuisen) were purchased from theBanboo Cakan Chinese tea ceremony (Kochi, Japan). D(-)-Mannitolwas purchased in its ß crystalline form from Merck Ltd (Tokyo, Japan).Low-substituted hydroxypropyl cellulose (L-HPC) (mean particle size,45 µm; hydroxyepoxy group, NBD-020) was supplied by Shin-etsuChemical Co., Ltd (Tokyo, Japan). Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)(Kollidon® 25) was obtained from BASF Japan (Tokyo, Japan). Gumarabic (Gum arabic HP powder), carrageenan (Sheepy gum® FA), guargum (Guar pack® PF-20), tamarind gum (Glyroid® 6C), and pectin (H&Fpectin classic AF701) were purchased from DSP Gokyo Food andChemical (Osaka, Japan). Yeast nitrogen base without amino acids waspurchased from Nippon Becton Dickinson Co., Ltd (Tokyo, Japan).Glucose, ammonium sulfate, polypeptone S, and monopotassiumphosphate were purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd(Osaka, Japan). Brain heart infusion was purchased from NissuiPharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan). All other reagents used wereof the highest grade available from commercial sources.2.2. Design of muco-adhesive tablet formulations containingpolysaccharide-coated tea powders2.2.1. Formulation of ODTTs containing polysaccharidesODTTs were prepared using an established method with a slightmodi?cation (Tanaka et al., 2016). Oolong tea leaves were groundusing a standard tea grinder (Tea?ne Mutow, Shizuoka, Japan). Theresulting powder was sieved through a 75-µm screen and 32 w/w% ofthe powdered tea was placed in a mortar. A 1.68 M Na2HPO4 aqueoussolution (40 w/w% mass fraction of the powdered tea mass) for use asan adsorption solvent was then dropped into the mortar using a pipette,and the resulting mixture was stirred using a pestle to obtain a homogenous mixture. Polysaccharide (1 w/w% mass fraction of the totalmass of mixed powder) was added and it adsorbed onto and coated thepowdered tea surface. The ODTT formulations are summarized inTable 1. D-Mannitol (55 w/w% or 56 w/w%), L-HPC (10 w/w%), andPVP (2 w/w%) were then added, and the resulting mixture was blendedwith the pestle. An additional portion of distilled water (45 w/w% massfraction of the total mass of mixed powder) was then added to themortar as a granulation solvent, and the resulting mixture was granulated for approximately 1 min. A portion (60 mg) of the wet granuleswas compressed using a compression test apparatus (MPC-100, OkadaSeiko, Tokyo, Japan) ?tted with several punches (ø 5 mm). Consideringthe further development of tablets which are easily handled and can betaken even by bedridden patients, smaller sized tablet (ø 5 mm) wasselected. A compression force of 0.43 kN was used for tablet preparation. The wet molded tablets were heated in a microwave oven (NEEH226, Panasonic, Osaka, Japan) at 500 W, which gave a reactiontemperature of 140 °C. After microwave treatment, the tablets wereFig. 1. Illustration of the interaction between oralmucosa and powdered tea after tablet disintegration.2International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X 1 (2019) 100012R. Kiniwa, et al.were repeated three times and the average values were calculated.Table 1ODTT formulations containing polysaccharides.2.3.4. Disintegration timeThe disintegration time was measured using an ODT tester (ODmate, Imotoseisakusyo, Kyoto, Japan). The bottom surface on which thetablets were placed was 4 mm mesh. The tablet was placed in the centerof the mesh, and the tester loading tool was placed on the top of thetablet. An aliquot (10 mL) of arti?cial saliva, which contained distilledwater (1 L), NaCl (1.44 g), KCl (1.47 g), and Tween 80 (3 g) and was at37 °C, was placed in a beaker and stirred at 1000 rpm. The tabletsandwiched between the loading tool and the bottom surface waslowered in the beaker to the predetermined position. The disintegrationtime was recorded as the period between when the tester arm waslowered to the predetermined position and when the loading tool touched the bottom of the mesh. The start and end points of each measurement were recorded by a photo microsensor. The maximum disintegration time for these experiments was set to 120 s. All of themeasurements were repeated three times and the average values werecalculated.%(w/w)Powdered teaPolysaccharideExcipientDisintegrantBinderUtonrousousuisenGum arabicCarrageenanGuar gumTamarind gumPectinD (-)-MannitolLow-substitutedhydroxypropyl cellulose (LHPC NBD-020)Polyyvinylpyrrolidone(PVP Kollidon® 25)TotalF1F2F3F4F5F632321323232321115610551055105510551015510222222100100100100100100dried in a thermostatic chamber at 80 °C for 24 h.2.2.2. Formulation of ODTTs with various tamarind gum mass fractionsWe formulated ODTTs with various tamarind gum mass fractions(Table 2). The mass fractions of powdered tea, L-HPC, and PVP did notchange; therefore, 32 w/w% of the powdered tea, 10 w/w% of L-HPCand 2 w/w% of PVP were used. The preparation method was similar tothat described in Section 2.2.1.2.3.5. Adhesive property of the tabletsThe adhesive properties of the tablets were measured using a tabletype tensile compression testing machine (Force Tester MCT-2150, A&DCo. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) (Ikeuchi-Takahashi et al., 2013). The tablet tobe analyzed was ?xed with double-sided tape to the movable adapter.Then, a mucin layer (10 w/v%) was prepared to the ?xed adapter.Arti?cial saliva (50 µL) was placed on the mucin layer, and the movableadapter with tablet was placed in contact with the mucin layer. Aftercon?rming that the tablet was in contact with the arti?cial saliva andmucin layer and maintaining for 20 s, the movable adapter was raised(Supplemental Fig. 1A). The load at that time was measured and theadhesiveness was calculated from the load and the tablet area using Eq.(2). All of these measurements were repeated three times and theaverage values were calculated.2.3. Characterization of ODTTs2.3.1. Swelling degreeThe degree of swelling was calculation according to Eq. (1).Swelling degree = Thickness Treated - ThicknessUntreated ,(1)where ThicknessTreated and ThicknessUntreated are the thickness of themicrowave -treated and untreated tablets, respectively. The thickness ofeach tablet was measured with a micrometer with a precision of0.01 mm (CD-20, Mitsutoyo Corporation, Kanagawa, Japan). Three tablets were randomly selected for thickness measurements and theaverage values were used for subsequent calculations.Adhesiveness =2.3.3. FriabilityThe tablet friability was determined using a tablet friability tester(Friabilator, Toyama Sangyo, Osaka, Japan) in accordance with theprocedure described in the seventeenth edition of the JapanesePharmacopoeia (Osei-Yeboah and Sun, 2015). All the measurementsParticle retention ratioBefore drop treatment (g ) - After drop treatment (g )=Before drop treatment (g )Table 2ODTT formulations containing tamarind gum.%(w/w)Powdered teaPolysaccharideExcipientDisintegrantBinderUtonrousousuisenTamarind gumD (-)-MannitolLow-substituted hydroxypropylcellulose (L-HPC NBD-020)Polyyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP Kollidon®25)Total135320.555.5103215510323531032551102222100100100100(2)2.3.6. Particle retention ratioEach tablet was pulverized with a mortar and pestle, and 100 mg ofthe pulverized powders which have same particle size and particle sizedistribution analyzed by a laser di?raction particle size analyzer(Mastersizer2000; Marvern, Worcestershire, UK)(data not shown), wassuspended in 1 mL of arti?cial saliva. For analysis, a mucin layer (10 w/v%) was prepared on a glass slide. The glass slide was inclined at 15°and the suspension was dropped on it at a rate of 1 mL/min(Supplemental Fig. 1B). The weights of the suspension before and afterthe test were used to calculate particle retention ratio on the mucinlayer (Eq. (3)). All of these measurements were repeated three timesand the average values were calculated.2.3.2. Tablet hardnessThe tablet fracture strength was de?ned as the force required tobreak the tablet by radial compression. The tablet hardness was determined using a tablet hardness tester (PC30, Okada Seiko, Tokyo,Japan). All of these measurements were repeated three times and theaverage values were calculated.0.5Load (N )Tablet area (m2)(3)2.3.7. Tablet surfaceThe tablet surface was observed using a scanning electron microscope (Miniscope®TM3030, Hitachi High-Technologies Co., Tokyo,Japan).2.3.8. Polysaccharide viscosityThe viscosity was measured using a viscometer (RV DV 2 T, EKOKOSEIKI Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) after dissolving 10 mg of each polysaccharide (gum arabic, carrageenan, guar gum, tamarind gum, orpectin) in 1 mL of 1.68 M aqueous Na2HPO4 with stirring for 1 min at3International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X 1 (2019) 100012R. Kiniwa, et al.Fig. 2. Tablet properties of orally disintegrating tea tablets manufactured using polysaccharides. (A) Swelling degree, (B) hardness, (C) friability, (D) disintegrationtime, (E) adhesive property with tablets, and (F) particle retention ratio. *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 versus the tablets without polysaccharide (F1). Each columnrepresents the mean ± S.D. (n = 3).Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) to determine the amounts of epigallocatechingallate (EGCG). A mixture of methanol (solvent A) and puri?ed water(solvent B), which was deaerated ultrasonically for more than 10 min inadvance, was used as the mobile phase with a ?ow rate of 1.0 mL/min.Quanti?cation was carried out on TSK ODS-80TM (150 mm × 4.6 mm,5 µm). The column temperature was 40 °C and the sample volume was5 µL. The detector was set at 280 nm. For the elution program, theproportion of solvent A was increased from 10% to 50% from 0 to30 min.In addition, to completely elute the EGCG from the oolong tealeaves, further incubation (100 rpm, 1 h) was performed after dissolution test and the total amount of EGCG was determined. The ratio ofEGCG released into the medium (%) was quantitatively obtained bydividing by the total amount of EGCG.12 rpm. Measurements were carried out at 25 °C and 80 °C. All of thesemeasurements were repeated three times and the average values werecalculated.2.3.9. Dissolution of epigallocatechin gallateA dissolution test was performed for polysaccharide-free tabletswithout microwave (F1-without microwave), ODTTs with microwave(F1), tablets containing 1 w/w% tamarind gum without microwave (F5without microwave), and ODTTs containing 1 w/w% (mass fraction)tamarind gum with microwave (F5) using the paddle apparatus. Eachtest was performed by placing 10 tablets in each vessel, which was ?lledwith 150 mL of pH 6.8 phosphate bu?er solution and kept at37 ± 0.5 °C. The paddle speed was adjusted to 50 rpm. Samples weretaken after 5, 10 min, 20 min, 30 min, 1 h, and 2 h. The samples were?ltered through a ?lter with a pore size of 0.20 µm and then applied forhigh-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (LC-2010CHT,4International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X 1 (2019) 100012R. Kiniwa, et al.Fig. 3. Scanning electron micrographs of the surfaces of orally disintegrating tea tablets manufactured using polysaccharides. Magni?cation 600× (F1, F2, F3, F4,F5, and F6). Yellow Triangles indicated the void with a diameter of over 3 µm. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ?gure legend, the reader isreferred to the web version of this article.)of the resulting mixture was adjusted to 7.1 with a sodium hydroxidesolution. This mixture was used as the catechin medium. The catechinmedium (8 mL), test solution (1 mL), and S. mutans (270 µL) were cultured for 24 h in brain heart infusion in a boiling tube. Thereafter,cultivation was carried out at 37 °C. The turbidity at 651.5 nm wasmeasured at 0, 3, 5, and 7 h using a spectrophotometer (UV-mini-1240,Shimadzu Co.) and used for determination of growth inhibition. Thesample containing arti?cial saliva was designated as the control forcomparison purposes. All of these measurements were repeated threetimes and the average values were calculated.2.4. Antibacterial e?ect2.4.1. Preparation of test solutionsFive polysaccharide-free tablets without microwave (F1-withoutmicrowave), Five ODTTs with microwave (F1), Five tablets containing1 w/w% tamarind gum without microwave (F5-without microwave),and Five ODTTs containing 1 w/w% tamarind gum with microwave(F5) were incubated in separate 10-mL aliquots of arti?cial saliva for1 h at 37 °C. After 10 min of sonication, centrifugation was performedfor 20 min. Each supernatant was ?ltered through a 0.20-µm sterilizing?lter to prepare a test solution.2.5. Statistical analysis2.4.2. Quantitative analysis of catechinsQuanti?cation of catechins (epicatechin gallate (ECG), gallocatechin gallate (GCG), epigallocatechin (EGC), and EGCG) in the prepared tablets was carried out by HPLC (LC-2010CHT) in the samemanner described in Section 2.3.9.All date were expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. In tablets properties, the statistical signi?cance of di?erences betweenODTTs with microwave (F1) and ODTTs with each polysaccharide, aswell as between ODTTs containing 1 w/w% tamarind gum with microwave (F5) and ODTTs containing 0.5, 3 and 5 w/w% tamarind gumwith microwave was determined using ANOVA. P-values < 0.05 wereconsidered to be statistically signi?cant.2.4.3. Evaluation of the antibacterial e?ectYeast nitrogen base without amino acids (4 g), glucose (2.5 g),ammonium sulfate (2.5 g) polypeptone S (1 g), monopotassium phosphate (0.5 g), and water (1000 mL) were added to a beaker, and the pH5International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X 1 (2019) 100012R. Kiniwa, et al.3. Results and discussiongum had higher viscosities than other polysaccharides at 25 °C. Weassumed that this was caused by aggregation of polysaccharide molecules by dehydration of saccharides and alcohols, and by formation ofhigher-order networks by hydrogen bonding of saccharides and alcohols with polysaccharide molecules. From these results, we consideredthat arti?cial saliva rapidly in?ltrated into F5 in the 20 s and the tamarind gum dissolved. The adhesiveness was high in this case becausetamarind gum strongly bound to mucin via hydrogen bonding. Guargum also had a high viscosity like tamarind gum, but the adhesivenessof the tablet containing guar gum was not as high as that of F5. Weconsidered that this di?erence was caused by the permeability of theODTTs. A small air gap was observed in F4 and it had a disintegrationtime of 120 s (Fig. 3), so the permeability to F4 appeared to be lowerthan that of F5. Therefore, despite the high viscosity, the amount ofguar gum dissolved was small and the adhesiveness of F4 was lowerthan that of F5. For the particle retention ratio, although bonding between the pulverized tablet particles and the mucin layer was relativelyhigh (Fig. 2F), F4 had a disintegration time of 120 s or more.In summary, although there were no di?erences in the swellingdegree, hardness, and friability among the formulations, F2 and F5quickly disintegrated within 30 s and F5 had high adhesiveness properties and a high particle retention ratio.3.1. Evaluation of ODTTs containing polysaccharides (1 w/w% massfraction)The degree of swelling, hardness, friability, disintegration time,adhesiveness, and particle retention ratio results are shown in Fig. 2.The degree of swelling did not di?er between formulations, and allformulations swelled by about 1 mm (Fig. 2A). This suggests that whenthe wet tablet was microwave irradiated, water vapor inside the tabletevaporated, and the tablet swelled. Su?cient swelling should shortenthe disintegration time. The results of our previous study showed thatswelling of over 0.2 mm was su?cient for shortening the disintegrationtime of ODTs (Sano et al., 2011). All formulations had hardness valuesof over 13 N (Fig. 2B), which is su?cient hardness for a 5-mm diametertablet (Tanaka et al., 2016). This is because the excipient D-mannitolmelts at 168 °C and forms strong particle-to-particle bonds during microwave irradiation. In addition, because of the high hardness, thefriability was < 1% in all formulations (Fig. 2C). However, the disintegration times were more than 120 s for F3, F4 and F6, which contained carrageenan, guar gum, and pectin, respectively (Fig. 2D). Bycomparison, F1 and F2, which contained gum arabic, and F5, whichcontained with tamarind gum, had disintegration times of < 30 s. According to the Food and Drug Administration, ODTs should disintegratewithin 30 s (FDA, 2008). The disintegration times of F1, F2, and F5satis?ed this requirement.We also observed the surfaces of the tablets by SEM (Fig. 3). Manysmall voids (diameter: over 3 µm) were observed in F1, F2, and F5,whereas few voids were observed in F3, F4, and F6. Generally, as thenumber of voids increases, the water permeation to the interior of thetablet increases and the disintegration time decreases (Kondo et al.,2012). By contrast, as the number of voids decreases, the water permeation decreases and the disintegration time increases. Therefore, thedisintegration times indicate that F1, F2, and F5 have many voids andgood water permeation.Among the tablets, F5 showed the highest adhesiveness with themucin layer (Fig. 2E and F). The high adhesiveness of tamarind gummight be caused by its viscosity. We measured the viscosities of thepolysaccharides at 25 °C and 80 °C (Fig. 4). Guar gum and tamarind3.2. E?ect of the tamarind gum concentration on physicochemicalproperties of the ODTTsOur results showed that ODTTs containing tamarind gum had goodhardness, rapid disintegration, and high adhesiveness. Therefore, weinvestigated the e?ect of the tamarind gum mass fraction on physicochemical properties of the ODTTs. We measured the degree of swelling,hardness, friability, disintegration time, adhesiveness, and particle retention ratio for tablets with tamarind gum mass fractions of 0.5, 1, 3,and 5 w/w% (Fig. 5). For ODTTs with tamarind gum mass fractions of0.5 and 1 w/w%, the degree of swelling was about 1 mm, but as thetamarind gum mass fraction increased to 3 and 5 w/w%, the degree ofswelling decreased to about 0.5 mm (Fig. 5A). This is because a gel wasformed in the tablet as the proportion of tamarind gum increased, andeven though microwave irradiation was carried out, the water vaporcould not su?ciently expand the tablet. The hardness values were over13 N in all formulations (Fig. 5B). Because of the high hardness, allformulations had friability values of < 1% (Fig. 5C), which suggeststhat the hardness is enough. When the tamarind gum mass fraction was0.5 or 1 w/w%, the disintegration time was < 30 s (Fig. 5D); however,as the tamarind gum mass fraction increased, the disintegration timeincreased to > 60 s.When we observed the tablet surfaces by SEM, many voids wereobserved in ODTTs containing 0.5 and 1 w/w% (mass fraction) tamarind gum, whereas hardly any voids were observed in ODTTs containing 3 and 5 w/w% (mass fraction) tamarind gum (Fig. 6). As discussed above, with an increase in the viscosity of tamarind gum, thesurface voids would disappear. This indicates that the lack of voidsprevents water permeation into the tablet and extends the disintegration time.The adhesive properties of the tablets increased as the mass fractionof tamarind gum increased (Fig. 5E). Because of the increase in thetamarind gum mass fraction, the viscosity increased and the bond withthe mucin layer became stronger. This increased the load and the adhesiveness increased. In addition, as the mass fraction of tamarind gumincreased, the particle retention ratio increased (Fig. 5F). It is thoughtthat as the content of tamarind gum bonded to the mucin layer increased, the adhesiveness increased. Therefore, although an increase inthe mass fraction of tamarind gum tended to enhance the adhesivenessof the tablet, addition of 1 w/w% tamarind gum produced tablets withsu?cient hardness, disintegration, and adhesiveness.Fig. 4. Viscosities of polysaccharides dissolved in a 1.68 M Na2HPO4 solution.(A) 25 °C and (B) 80 °C. *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 versus gum arabic. Eachcolumn represents the mean ± S.D. (n = 3).6International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X 1 (2019) 100012R. Kiniwa, et al.Fig. 5. Properties of orally disintegrating tea tablets manufactured using tamarind gum. (A) Swelling degree, (B) hardness, (C) friability, (D) disintegration time, (E)adhesiveness, and (F) particle retention ratio. *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 versus the tablets with 1 w/w% tamarind gum. Each column represents the mean ± S.D.(n = 3).microwave -treated tablets (F1 and F5) showed rapid dissolutioncompared with tablets prepared without microwave. This was becausethe powdered tea became friable at the high temperature induced bymicrowave irradiation, and this increased the EGCG dissolution.3.3. Evaluation of the dissolution behavior of EGCGWe studied the dissolution behavior of EGCG, which is an activecompound in tea leaves (Fig. 7). We examined its dissolution usingODTTs containing 1 w/w% (mass fraction) tamarind gum and preparedwith microwave (F5). These tablets showed rapid disintegration andhigh adhesiveness. In addition, we carried out a dissolution test withpolysaccharide-free tablets without microwave (F1-without microwave), ODTTs with microwave (F1), and tablets containing 1 w/w%(mass fraction) tamarind gum without microwave (F5-without microwave). F1 showed the highest dissolution rate until 30 min, and after1 h, all tablets showed dissolution rates of almost 90%. Compared withF1 and F5, even with the addition of tamarind gum, F5 showed a dissolution rate of 90% or more after 1 h. Therefore, addition of tamarindgum hardly a?ected the dissolution rate of EGCG. In addition,3.4. Quantitative analysis of catechinIn addition to the dissolution study of EGCG, we extracted otheractive compounds from the tablets and performed quantitative analysesfor further antibacterial studies. The quantitative values for all compounds (ECG, GCG, EGC, and EGCG) (Table 3) were lower after microwave treatment than before. This indicates that they were likelyconverted to other compounds by microwave irradiation or decomposed. However, even when tamarind gum was added, fast dissolutionwas observed compared with the tablet without tamarind gum. This7International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X 1 (2019) 100012R. Kiniwa, et al.Fig. 6. Scanning electron micrographs of the surfaces of orally disintegrating tea tablets manufactured using tamarind gum. Magni?cation 40× (0.5, 1, 3 and 5 w/w%).Fig. 7. Dissolution pro?le of EGCG from polysaccharide-free ODTTs with/without microwave and ODTTs containing 1 w/w% (mass fraction) tamarindgum with/without microwave. Each symbol represents the mean ± S.D.(n = 3).suggests that tamarind gum does not a?ect the active ingredients contents (ECG, GCG, EGC, and EGCG).Fig. 8. Evaluation of the antibacterial e?ects when extracts from tablets weretreated. *p < 0.01 versus control. Each symbol represents the mean ± S.D.(n = 3).3.5. Evaluation of the antibacterial e?ectNext, we studied the antimicrobial activity against S. mutans(Fig. 8). The vertical axis represents the absorbance at 651.5 nm. ATable 3Quantitative analysis of active compounds in tea powder.F1-witout microwaveECG (µg/mL)GCG (µg/mL)EGC (µg/mL)EGCG (µg/mL)8.43 ± 1.214.04 ± 0.3482.1 ± 8.59620.8 ± 2.36F1*3.31 ± 2.391.30 ± 0.4745.4 ± 4.19563.8 ± 0.66**F5-without microwaveF56.49 ± 2.422.99 ± 1.4476.4 ± 2.27623.5 ± 2.314.74 ± 0.211.09 ± 0.1053.8 ± 10.7579.1 ± 2.92??*p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 versus F1-without microwave group. ??p < 0.01 versus F5-without microwave. Each value represents the mean ± S.D. (n = 3).8International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X 1 (2019) 100012R. Kiniwa, et al.Appendix A. Supplementary datahigher absorbance value means S. mutans is proliferating, whereas alower absorbance value means that growth of S. mutans is suppressed.The absorbance of the control gradually increased with time andmarked proliferation of S. mutans was observed. In all formulations, theabsorbances were markedly low and little bacterial growth was observed, indicating that all formulations had growth inhibitory e?ects.From the results of dissolution tests, we found EGCG had a dissolutionrate of 90% or more at 1 h (Fig. 7). Therefore, although the amounts ofthe active compound in F1 and F5 were a little bit lower than those intablets prepared without microwave irradiation, su?cient EGCG waspresent to show antibacterial activity. Overall, the slight di?erences oftotal amounts of EGCG did not a?ect the antibacterial properties. Previously, EGCG have been reported to inhibit the formation of glucosyltransferases and bio?lms at 500 µg/mL (Koo et al., 2002), which issimilar to our results. We can conclude that polyphenols extracted fromtea leaves seems show signi?cant growth inhibitory e?ects.Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpx.2019.100012.ReferencesAlmajano, M.P., Carbó, R., Jiménez, J.A.L., Gordon, M.H., 2008. Antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of tea infusions. Food Chem. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2007.10.040.Avachat, A.M., Dash, R.R., Shrotriya, S.N., 2011. Recent investigations of plant basednatural gums, mucilages and resins in novel drug delivery systems. Indian J. Pharm.Educ. Res doi:Nill.Baine, W.B., Yu, W., Summe, J.P., 2001. Epidemiologic trends in the hospitalization ofelderly medicare patients for pneumonia, 1991–1998. Am. J. Public Health 91,1121–1123. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.91.7.1121.Caron, G., Visentin, S., Pontremoli, C., Ermondi, G., 2015. Pro?le of the intermolecularforces governing the interaction of drugs with mucin. Int. J. Pharm. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.04.058.Cavet, M.E., Harrington, K.L., Vollmer, T.R., Ward, K.W., Zhang, J.-Z., 2011. Anti-in?ammatory and anti-oxidative e?ects of the green tea polyphenol epigallocatechingallate in human corneal epithelial cells. Mol. Vis.Charles, C.H., Mostler, K.M., Bartels, L.L., Mankodi, S.M., 2004. Comparative antiplaqueand antigingivitis e?ectiveness of a chlorhexidine and an essential oil mouthrinse: 6month clinical trial. J. Clin. Periodontol. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-051X.2004.00578.x.Datta, R., Bandyopadhyay, A.K., 2006. A new nasal drug delivery system for diazepamusing natural mucoadhesive polysaccharide obtained from tamarind seeds. SaudiPharm. J.Dickinson, E., 2003. Hydrocolloids at interfaces and the in?uence on the properties ofdispersed systems. Food Hydrocoll. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0268-005X(01)00120-5.Du, X., Huang, X., Huang, C., Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., 2012. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate(EGCG) enhances the therapeutic activity of a dental adhesive. J. Dent. 40, 485–492.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdent.2012.02.013.Ebihara, S., Sekiya, H., Miyagi, M., Ebihara, T., Okazaki, T., 2016. Dysphagia, dystussia,and aspiration pneumonia in elderly people. J. Thorac. Dis. 8, 632–639. https://doi.org/10.21037/jtd.2016.02.60.FDA, 2008. Guidance for industry: orally disintegrating tablets. Cent. Drug Eval. Res.https://doi.org/10.3354/ab00285.Ferrazzano, G.F., Amato, I., Ingenito, A., De Natale, A., Pollio, A., 2009. Anti-cariogenice?ects of polyphenols from plant stimulant beverages (cocoa, co?ee, tea).Fitoterapia. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.?tote.2009.04.006.Forssten, S.D., Björklund, M., Ouwehand, A.C., 2010. Streptococcus mutans, caries andsimulation models. Nutrients. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu2030290.Graham, H.N., 1992. Green tea composition, consumption, and polyphenol chemistry.Prev. Med. (Baltim). https://doi.org/10.1016/0091-7435(92)90041-F.Ikeuchi-Takahashi, Y., Sasatsu, M., Onishi, H., 2013. Evaluation of matrix type mucoadhesive tablets containing indomethacin for buccal application. Int. J. Pharm.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2013.06.007.Jalil, A.M.M., Ismail, A., 2008. Polyphenols in cocoa and cocoa products: is there a linkbetween antioxidant properties and health? Molecules. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules13092190.James, P., Worthington, H.V., Parnell, C., Harding, M., Lamont, T., Cheung, A., Whelton,H., Riley, P., 2017. Chlorhexidine mouthrinse as an adjunctive treatment for gingivalhealth. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD008676.pub2.Kondo, K., Niwa, T., Danjo, K., 2012. Evaluation of disintegration properties of orallyrapidly disintegrating tablets using a novel disintegration tester. Chem. Pharm. Bull.https://doi.org/10.1248/cpb.c12-00307.Koo, H., Pearson, S.K., Scott-Anne, K., Abranches, J., Cury, J.A., Rosalen, P.L., Park, Y.K.,Marquis, R.E., Bowen, W.H., 2002. E?ects of apigenin and tt-farnesol on glucosyltransferase activity, bio?lm viability and caries development in rats. Oral Microbiol.Immunol. https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-302X.2002.170602.x.Langmore, S.E., Terpenning, M.S., Schork, A., Chen, Y., Murray, J.T., Lopatin, D.,Loesche, W.J., 1998. Predictors of aspiration pneumonia: how important is dysphagia? Dysphagia 13, 69–81. https://doi.org/10.1007/PL00009559.Leme, A.F.P., Koo, H., Bellato, C.M., Bedi, G., Cury, J.A., 2006. The role of sucrose incariogenic dental bio?lm formation – new insight. J. Dent. Res. https://doi.org/10.1177/154405910608501002.Li, M., Wang, Z., Han, W.-J., Lu, S.-Y., Fang, Y.-Z., 2015. E?ect of feeding management onaspiration pneumonia in elderly patients with dysphagia. Chinese Nurs. Res. 2,40–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cnre.2015.09.004.Manabe, T., Teramoto, S., Tamiya, N., Okochi, J., Hizawa, N., 2015. Risk factors foraspiration pneumonia in older adults. PLoS One 10. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0140060.Miyashita, N., Yamauchi, Y., 2018. Bacterial pneumonia in elderly Japanese populations.Japanese Clin. Med. Med. https://doi.org/10.1177/1179670717751433.Nayak, A.K., Pal, D., Santra, K., 2014. Tamarind seed polysaccharide-gellan mucoadhesive beads for controlled release of metformin HCl. Carbohydr. Polym. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.12.031.Osei-Yeboah, F., Sun, C.C., 2015. Validation and applications of an expedited tabletfriability method. Int. J. Pharm. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.02.061.Percival, R.S., Devine, D.A., Duggal, M.S., Chartron, S., Marsh, P.D., 2006. The e?ect of4. ConclusionsWe used polysaccharides to prepare ODTTs with adhesive propertiesfor use as novel oral care preparations. The prepared ODTTs had aswelling degree of about 1 mm, hardness of 13 N or more, and friabilityof 1% or less. Among the ODTTs, those containing tamarind gum disintegrated in 30 s or less because there were many voids on the tabletsurface for water to penetrate. The adhesive properties and particleretention ratios were also highest in the ODTTs containing tamarindgum, which could be attributed to the rapid disintegration and highviscosity of the tamarind gum itself. When we increased the tamarindgum mass fraction in the formulation, the swelling degree decreased toabout 0.5 mm and the disintegration time increased. This is because thethickening action of the gum increases as its mass fraction increases,and the tablet surface is covered by a gel. This prevents void and suppresses water penetration. Although the adhesive properties and particle retention ratios increased as the mass fraction of tamarind gumincreased, the disintegration time was adversely a?ected. Therefore,among the mass fractions we studied, 1 w/w% tamarind gum is best forpreparation of ODTTs. In our dissolution tests, even with the addition oftamarind gum, the dissolution rate was 90% or more after 1 h, indicating that addition of tamarind gum hardly a?ected the dissolutionrate of EGCG. When we evaluated the antimicrobial activities of ODTTswith/without 1 w/w% tamarind gum, we observed growth inhibitionagainst S. mutans with all formulations. In summary, ODTTs containing1 w/w% tamarind gum have su?cient hardness, disintegration, adhesiveness, and antibacterial activity. Especially, Du et al., demonstratedthat the dental adhesives containing 200 or 300 µg/mL EGCG werefound to exhibit inhibitory e?ect on the growth of S. mutans (Du et al.,2012), speculating that polyphenols extracted from ODTTs with mucoadhesive property might show signi?cant growth inhibitory e?ects invivo. Future studies using animal models with periodontal disease areneeded to determine whether the ODTTs with tamarind gum work asexpected in the oral cavity. If they do, they could be used for selfmedication to contribute to the health of many people.Declaration of interestNone.AcknowledgementsWe thank Gabrielle David, PhD, from Edanz Group (www.edanzediting.com/ac) for editing a draft of this manuscript. This study wassupported by Over the Counter (OTC) self-medication promotionfoundation grant No. 28-2A-013. Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122Contents lists available at ScienceDirectJournal of Pharmaceutical Analysisjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jpaReview paperHollow ?ber-based liquid phase microextraction followed byanalytical instrumental techniques for quantitative analysis of heavymetal ions and pharmaceuticalsWajid Ali Khan a, Muhammad Balal Arain a, b, **, Yadollah Yamini c, Nasrullah Shah a,Tasneem Gul Kazi d, Stig Pedersen-Bjergaard e, *, Mohammad Tajik caDepartment of Chemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, 23200, KPK, PakistanDepartment of Chemistry, University of Karachi, 75270, Karachi, PakistanDepartment of Chemistry, Tarbiat Modares University, P. O. Box 14115-175, Tehran, IrandNational Center of Excellence in Analytical Chemistry, University of Sindh, Jamshoro, 76080, Sindh, PakistaneSchool of Pharmacy, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norwaybca r t i c l e i n f oa b s t r a c tArticle history:Received 6 September 2019Received in revised form9 December 2019Accepted 11 December 2019Available online 12 December 2019Hollow-?ber liquid-phase microextraction (HF-LPME) and electromembrane extraction (EME) areminiaturized extraction techniques, and have been coupled with various analytical instruments for traceanalysis of heavy metals, drugs and other organic compounds, in recent years. HF-LPME and EME providehigh selectivity, ef?cient sample cleanup and enrichment, and reduce the consumption of organic solvents to a few micro-liters per sample. HF-LPME and EME are compatible with different analytical instruments for chromatography, electrophoresis, atomic spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, andelectrochemical detection. HF-LPME and EME have gained signi?cant popularity during the recent years.This review focuses on hollow ?ber based techniques (especially HF-LPME and EME) of heavy metals andpharmaceuticals (published 2017 to May 2019), and their combinations with atomic spectroscopy, UVVIS spectrophotometry, high performance liquid chromatography, gas chromatography, capillary electrophoresis, and voltammetry.© 2019 Xi'an Jiaotong University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access articleunder the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Keywords:Hollow ?ber liquid phase microextractionElectromembrane extractionHeavy metalsPharmaceuticalsInstrumental techniques1. IntroductionMost analytical methods include sample preparation prior to theinstrumental analysis. The purpose of the sample preparation is tomake the sample compatible with the analytical instrument, toremove interfering matrix components and to enrich the targetanalytes to a detectable level [1]. Different sample preparationtechniques are available, but liquid-liquid extraction (LLE) andsolid-phase extraction (SPE) have been the most popular ones [2].For several decades, different microextraction variants of LLE andSPE have been developed. This was originally motivated byreduction or elimination of organic solvents [3] and was initiated byPeer review under responsibility of Xi'an Jiaotong University.* Corresponding author.** Corresponding author at: Department of Chemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, 23200, KPK, Pakistan.E-mail addresses: bilal_ku2004@yahoo.com (M.B. Arain), stig.pedersenbjergaard@farmasi.uio.no (S. Pedersen-Bjergaard).the invention of solid-phase microextraction (SPME) by Pawliszynet al. [4] and liquid-phase microextraction (LPME) by Jeannot andCantwell [5]. Since the introduction of these innovative samplepreparation methods, a variety of SPME and LPME methods havebeen reported in the literature. Head-space solid phase microextraction (HS-SPME), in-tube solid phase microextraction (ITSPME), thin-?lm solid phase microextraction (TF-SPME), headspace liquid phase microextraction (HS-LPME), liquid-liquidmicroextraction based on solidi?cation of ?oating organic droplet(LLME-SFO), and dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction (DLLME)are examples in this direction [6e11]. While SPME has becomecommercially available, LPME is still performed with laboratorybuilt devices. In spite of this, LPME is still a very active area ofresearch for reasons including 1) simplicity, 2) costs, 3) greenchemistry, 4) selectivity, and 5) method sensitivity. Fig. 1 illustratesdifferent con?gurations and approaches to LPME. LPME was originally performed as single drop microextraction (SDME) [12]. SDMEis still under development, but in this approach the stability of thedroplet of organic solvent may be an issue.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpha.2019.12.0032095-1779/© 2019 Xi'an Jiaotong University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).110W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122Fig. 1. Classi?cation of liquid phase microextraction techniques.Considering these limitations, hollow ?ber protected liquidphase microextraction (HF-LPME) was introduced in 1999 [13]. Inthe ?rst paper, HF-LPME was utilized for preconcentration andextraction of pharmaceuticals prior to electrophoretic identi?cation and determination. An aqueous extraction solvent was injectedinto the lumen of a porous polypropylene hollow ?ber membrane,while the porous wall was impregnated by an organic supportedliquid membrane (SLM). As the extraction solvent (acceptor phase)was not in direct contact with the sample solution, the extractionsystem was stable, and highly ef?cient sample cleanup was achieved with this innovative strategy. HF-LPME can be utilized forquantitative analysis from very complex environmental and biological samples [14].A typical HF-LPME setup consists of a porous hollow ?bermembrane made of polypropylene, polytetra?uoroethylene, andpolyvinylidene ?uoride, which is impregnated with an organicsolvent. The solvent is immobilized in the pores in the wall of thehollow ?ber membrane and serves as supported liquid membrane(SLM) [15]. The acceptor phase can be either an aqueous solution oran organic solvent. Due to this ?exibility, HF-LPME is compatiblewith most analytical instruments for chromatography, electrophoresis, molecular and atomic spectrometry, and electrochemistry. The current review discusses recent applications of HF-basedmicroextraction for pharmaceutical and heavy metal applications,and on their compatibility with different instrumental methods.2. Principles and possible modes of the HF-LPMEIn HF-based LPME methods, the extraction phase is placed in thelumen of a porous hollow ?ber. In such a way, the acceptor phase isprotected by the SLM. To perform HF-LPME, a polypropylene hollow ?ber membrane may ?rst be sonicated in acetone to removepolymer impurities [16]. Then the hollow ?ber membrane is soakedin an impregnating solvent to ?ll the pores of the HF membrane bycapillary forces, and excess solvent may be removed by washingwith distilled water [17]. After this step, the lumen of the hollow?ber is ?lled with the acceptor phase. As is thoroughly discussedbelow, the acceptor phase can be the same organic solvent as theSLM (the two-phase mode) or can be an aqueous solution (thethree-phase mode). Finally, the hollow ?ber is immersed in thesample solution and the analytes are extracted from the sample,through the SLM and into the acceptor phase [18]. Four differentarrangements for HF-LPME have been reported, i.e., rod like, ushaped, hollow-?ber solvent bar, and knotted hollow-?ber.Considering the physicochemical characteristics of the desiredanalytes and levels of complexity of the sample, HF-LPME can beperformed in a two- or three-phase mode.2.1. Two-phase HF-LPMEIn two-phase HF-LPME, the pores in the wall of the hollow ?berand the lumen are ?lled with an organic solvent, which is immiscible with the aqueous sample solution. Solvents like 1-octanol anddihexyl ether are commonly used [19]. Two-phase HF-LPME isapplied for extraction and preconcentration of analytes with lowpolarity such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Since theanalytes are extracted into an organic solvent, two-phase LPME iscompatible with gas chromatography. Fig. 2 illustrates the principleof two-phase HF-LPME. According to this the SLM and the organicacceptor phase are the same in two-phase HF-LPME.2.2. Three-phase HF-LPMEIn three-phase LPME, the pores in the wall of the hollow ?berare ?lled with an organic solvent immiscible with water, while thelumen is ?lled with aqueous solution (acceptor solution). 1-Octanoland Dihexylether are common solvents [20]. The mechanism ofextraction is based on pH adjustment of the sample solution andthe aqueous acceptor phase. For instance, extraction of acidiccompounds is achieved by acidi?cation of the sample to suppressionization of the target analytes. This results in successful transferof analytes towards the acceptor phase through the organic SLM.pH of the aqueous acceptor solution should be adjusted to a pHvalue 2e3 units above pKa of the analyte.Carrier mediated three-phase HF-LPME was introduced where ahydrophobic carrier was dissolved in the organic SLM before theimpregnation of the HF pores [21]. The applied carrier is an organiccompound capable of ion-pairing with analytes of interest. Hence,at the contact region between the sample solution and the SLM, thedesired ion-pair complexes are formed, leading to successfulextraction of target analytes. At the contact region between theSLM and the aqueous acceptor phase, the analyte is exchanged withW.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122111Fig. 2. A schematic mechanism of the two-phase HF-LPME.a suitable inorganic counter ion dissolved in the acceptor solution,and is released into the acceptor solution.As mentioned, three-phase HF-LPME can be applied for ionizable compounds (acids and bases). Two-phase HF-LPME offers highPFs and extraction ef?ciencies for non-polar analytes. However,because the SLM and the acceptor phase are the same organicsolvent, there is no phase boundary. Therefore, cleanup is limited.Interestingly, Ghambarian et al. introduced a variant where ndodecane was used as the organic SLM, while organic solvents likemethanol, ethanol, or acetonitrile, which are all immiscible with ndodecane, were used as acceptor phase [22]. This strategy providedimproved sample clean-up, while extraction ef?ciency was notsacri?ced. Fig. 3 illustrates the principles of three-phase HF-LPME.HF-LPME can be carried out through static, dynamic, and evenfully automated strategies. One of the most interesting approachesfor dynamic HF-LPME was introduced by Esra?li et al. called TTextraction [23]. Between two T connectors, a stainless-steel tubewas mounted, housing the hollow ?ber membrane. The samplesolution was pumped into the TT-extractor through the two Tconnectors, while the acceptor phase was injected into the hollow?ber membrane via a syringe pump. This con?guration was capableof carrying out two-phase HF-LPME. Fig. 4 illustrates this innovative approach with all the details. In another strategy offered by thesame research group, a fully automated HF-LPME with capabilityfor two- and three-phase HF-LPME procedures was developed. Inthis setup, a syringe pump was used for washing, ?lling, andejection of different solvents. Four containers were used forwashing solvent, SLM, extraction solvent, and elution solvent. Theextraction system was successfully connected with liquid chromatography. Fig. 5 shows the graphical design of this HF-LPMEinstrument [24].2.3. Electromembrane extractionIn HF-LPME, mass transfer is by passive diffusion and this resultsin relatively slow extraction kinetics. Alternatively, ionizable compounds can be extracted ef?ciently and with outstanding samplecleanup by electromembrane extraction (EME) [25]. The principleFig. 3. Schematic mechanisms of two possible modes of three-phase HF-LPME.112W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122Fig. 4. Schematic con?guration of the dynamic HF-LPME. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [23].Fig. 5. (A) Illustrative con?guration and (B) schematic structure of the automated HF-LPME offered by Esra?li et al. Reprinted with permissions from Ref. [24].of EME is similar to that of HF-LPME. However, in EME the analytesare extracted selectively in their charged form under the in?uenceof an electrical ?eld. Thus mass transfer is by electrokineticmigration across the SLM, and 2-nitrophenyl octyl ether (NPOE) isoften used as SLM. The setup for EME is very similar to three-phaseHF-LPME, but in EME two electrodes (usually platinum wires) areutilized. One electrode is placed in the acceptor phase into thehollow ?ber lumen, while the second electrode is inserted into thesample solution. Fig. 6 shows the principle of EME.For extraction of basic analytes, the cathode (-) is placed insidethe acceptor phase, while for acidic analytes the direction of theelectrical ?eld is reversed [18]. After extraction, the acceptor phaseis collected with a micro-syringe and injected into an analyticalinstrument for quantitative analysis. Due to the electrical ?eldacross the SLM, bubble formation, Joule heating, and even punctuation of SLM may occur in EME systems operated under nonoptimal conditions. These phenomena occur in longer extractiontimes as a result of excessive migration of ions across SLM. Also,when the electrical ?eld is applied, electrical double layers andlocal pH gradients are formed in the interfaces between the SLMand the aqueous solutions on both side. These may impact the masstransfer. To reduce the impact of these phenomena, application ofconstant direct electrical current and application of pulsed voltagehave been reported [26]. Although the utilization of a stabilized andconstant direct current improved the ef?ciency and stability ofEME, this approach is still not common in EME publications. Pulsedelectromembrane extraction (PEME) was introduced as a strategyto enhance the ef?ciency of EME using a simple and inexpensiveextraction setup [27]. Pulsed voltage was found to improveextraction ef?ciency and system stability.3. Operational parameters of HF-LPME and EMEThe type of hollow-?ber membrane, type of extraction solvent,pH of donor and acceptor phases, extraction time, stirring rate, saltaddition, and temperature are important parameters in HF-LPMEand EME. Applied voltage and electrode material, thickness, anddistance are additional parameters affecting EME performance.W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122113Fig. 6. A schematic mechanism for electromembrane extraction.3.1. Hollow-?ber membraneThe porous wall of the hollow-?ber serves as support for theSLM. The SLM solvent should be of low polarity and immisciblewith water. For immobilization of such low-polarity solvents, thehollow-?ber should be of hydrophobic material [28]. In most cases,polypropylene hollow-?ber membranes have been used. Suchhollow-?bers are commercially available at a low price. Therefore,each hollow-?ber membrane is used only for a single extractionand is then discarded. Alternatively, polyvinylidene di?uoridehollow-?ber membranes can be used [14].3.2. Supported liquid membrane (SLM)The solvent selected for the SLM plays a major role for the stability and the ef?ciency of the extraction system both in HF-LPMEand EME. First, the solvent should be non-volatile in order toavoid evaporation, and solvents with boiling point exceeding200  C are recommended. Second, the solvent should be immisciblewith water in order to avoid leakage to the sample. Usually solventswith water solubility less than 0.5 mg/mL are recommended. Third,the solvent should facilitate ef?cient mass transfer of target analyte[14]. In HF-LPME, high ef?ciency can often be obtained with a variety of organic solvents. Common organic solvents for HF-LPMEinclude n-dihexyl ether, 1-octanol, dodecyl acetate, and toluene.Ionic liquids have also been used as SLM solvent in HF-LPME [28]. InEME, the type of solvent used for the SLM is much more critical[29]. This is due to the fact that analyte molecules are charged whenentering the organic SLM, and partition is voltage dependent.Common organic solvents used in EME are 2enitrophenyloctylether (NPOE) and 1-octanol.3.3. Sample and acceptor pHSample and acceptor pH plays a major role both in HF-LPME andEME. In HF-LPME, the analyte is extracted in neutral form into theSLM, while it is ionized in contact with the acceptor. Therefore, forextraction of basic analytes, the sample should be alkaline, whilethe acceptor should be acidic or neutral (depending on analyte pKavalue). For HF-LPME of acidic analytes, the pH gradient is reversedusing acidic conditions in the sample and alkaline or neutral conditions in the acceptor [30,31]. In EME, the analytes are ionized inthe entire extraction system. Thus, for basic analytes, both thesample and the acceptor are neutral or acidic. For acidic analytes,EME is conducted with neutral or alkaline conditions in sample andacceptor [32]. Due to local pH effects [33] at the SLM boundarylayers, pH in the acceptor solution is critical in EME, and for basicanalytes pH should be no less than three units above pKa. Inaddition, pH may change in the sample and acceptor during EMEdue to electrolysis [34], and therefore buffers are recommended inboth sample and acceptor.3.4. Extraction timeBoth HF-LPME and EME are equilibrium techniques. This impliesthat extraction recovery increases rapidly versus time during initialextraction, and after a certain period of time, the systems enterequilibrium. Thus, from a theoretical point of view, recovery isconstant from this point forward and extraction is terminated.Equilibrium time is typically in the range 30e60 min for HF-LPMEdepending on the chemical properties of the analytes and the geometry of the system [35]. For EME, equilibrium time is shorter, dueto the electro-kinetic mass transfer, and ranges typically from 5 to15 min. In EME, recoveries may drop during prolonged extractiondue to pH changes in sample and acceptor, and due to instability ofthe SLM [36].3.5. Stirring/agitationHF-LPME and EME are performed under stirring or agitationconditions. By such, convection is induced in the sample and analyte mass transfer to the SLM is facilitated. In addition, stirring oragitation reduces the boundary layer thickness at the sample/SLMinterface, and this is very important for ef?cient mass transfer [31].The optimal stirring or agitation rate is geometry dependent, and isnormally optimized during method development. Typically, stirring or agitation in the range 500e1000 rpm is used. At higherrates, air bubbles are often formed, and this can reduce extractionperformance [37].3.6. Salt additionAddition of salt to the sample affects the ef?ciency of HF-LPMEand EME. In HF-LPME, the addition of salt to the sample solution114W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122often increases the extraction ef?ciency [38,39]. The increase inextraction ef?ciency is due to increased ionic strength in thesample, which increases analyte partition into the organic SLM.However, negative effects of salt in the samples are also reported[40,41]. This may be due to changes in the Nernst diffusion ?lmcontrolling the diffusion rate of analytes into the acceptor phase[42,43]. Typical salt additions are 5%e30% (w/v) [44]. In EME,addition of salt to the sample is normally not performed. For ef?cient EME, a low ion balance may be favorable under certain conditions [45e47]. The ion balance is de?ned as the ratio between thetotal amount of ions in the sample and the total amount of ions inthe acceptor phase.3.7. TemperatureHF-LPME and EME are normally performed at room temperature. Both extraction modes are affected by temperature. Partitioncoef?cients decrease with the increase in temperature, whilediffusion across the SLM increases. Temperatures up to 40 C havebeen used, but above this temperature SLMs tend to be less stable[37,48].3.8. Electrodes (EME)Platinum is normally used as inert electrode material in EME.The electrode thickness plays a key role in EME. The internaldiameter of the electrodes should be substantially less than theinner diameter of the hollow ?ber in order not to displace acceptorphase. The distance between the electrodes is another importantparameter [49].3.9. Applied voltage (EME)Generally, the extraction ef?ciency in EME increases with theincreasing voltage up to a certain level. Above this, there is nofurther gain in extraction ef?ciency, and mass transfer is no longerlimited by the voltage. Voltages applied in EME normally rangefrom 5 to 300 V. Voltages exceeding 300 V are not recommended,due to instability of the extraction system and generation of gasbubbles (electrolysis) [37].micro?uidic paper-based analytical device (mPAD) for extractionof Cr (VI). The membrane was impregnated in a mixture of Aliquat336 and 1-octanol for 1 min. The acceptor phase was collected forcolorimetric analysis after EME, and DPC reagent was added. Forquantitative analysis a scanner was used and colored images wereanalyzed with RGB. The results were compared with ICP-AES andfound in good agreement [57].4.1.2. UVevisible spectrophotometryUVevisible spectrophotometry has been commonly selected asinstrumental technique for quantitative analysis of heavy metals,highly conjugated organic compounds, and biological macromolecules due to easy availability, simplicity, versatility, speed, accuracy,precision, and cost-effectiveness. However, in complex samples theanalytes cannot be measured directly with a UVevisible spectrophotometer due to low concentration. Therefore a sample preparation step is necessary to improve selectivity and sensitivity.Atikarnsakul et al. presented an EME procedure for preconcentration and extraction of Cr(VI). Polypropylene hollow ?ber membranewas impregnated with NPOE and used for EME. For quantitativeanalysis, a speci?c volume of acceptor phase was mixed with aspeci?c concentration of DPC and acidi?ed with dilute H2SO4. Theresultant red-violet solution was analyzed with a ?ber opticultravioletevisible spectrophotometer with a Z-?ow cell at 544 nm[61].Onac et al. introduced a new approach to preconcentration andextraction of Cr(VI). A polymer inclusion membrane was synthesized and used as SLM for EME. The polymer inclusion membraneimpregnated with NPOE contained calix [4]arene. The EME processwas performed under constant current instead of constant voltageto control the extraction of charged species. The use of constantcurrent in EME provided high reproducibility and mechanical stability. The formation of metal-calix [4]arene ion pair at themembrane-aqueous phase interface enhanced the transport ofmetal-complex ion through the membrane. Bath-water of chromeplating industry was used as real sample for analysis to check theselectivity of calix [4]arene towards Cr(VI) [62]. Table 1 summarizesexamples on research combining hollow ?ber based extractiontechniques with UVeVis spectrophotometry [61e65].4.2. Pharmaceuticals4. Instrumental techniques coupled with HF-LPME and EME4.1. Heavy metals determination?4.1.1. Atomic spectrometryCombinations of hollow ?ber based techniques and atomicspectroscopic techniques have mainly been used for detection ofheavy metals in environmental, clinical, and biological samples,petroleum products, pharmaceuticals, and in food [50]. The hollow?ber based techniques coupled with atomic spectrometric techniques for preconcentration and determination of different heavymetals are summarized in Table 1 [51e60]. HF-LPME has beencoupled to ?ame atomic absorption spectroscopy (FAAS) andgraphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry (GFAAS) formetal analysis [51e55]. In one example, Tahmasebi et al. introduced a new approach to the extraction of Cr (VI) based on EMEcoupled with electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry(ETAAS). Before using the hollow ?ber membrane as SLM, polyaniline nanoparticles were coated on the surface to increase theselectivity for the extraction of Cr(VI). The polyaniline reinforcedhollow ?ber selectively extracted Cr (VI) from real samples viaanion exchange. The surface area of the nanostructure coated polyaniline increased the preconcentration of the target analyte [56].In another example Alahmad et al. introduced an HF-LPME4.2.1. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)Three-phase HF-LPME and EME are ideal for acidic and basicdrugs. In three-phase HF-LPME, the acceptor phase is an aqueoussolution, and this can be injected directly into HPLC systemswithout previous evaporation and reconstitution [30]. For extraction of basic analytes in HF-LPME, pH of donor phase must be keptalkaline to suppress the ionization and solubility of the analyte,whereas pH for acceptor phase should be acidic. In case of acidicanalytes, the pH gradient across the SLM is reversed [30,31]. Forextraction of basic analytes in EME, pH of donor and acceptorphases are kept acidic to ionize the analytes. The anode is placed inthe donor phase, while the cathode is placed in the acceptor phaseto facilitate the migration of analyte. In case of acidic analytes, thedonor and acceptor phases are made alkaline and the direction ofthe electrical ?eld is reversed [30,32]. Three-phase systems providebetter degree of clean-up than two phase systems due to the factthat most water soluble components do not pass through the SLM.Khan et al. presented a new strategy for selective and simultaneous extraction of three drugs with different hydrophobicityproperty. The EME process was carried out in a micro?uidic chipdevice. The micro?uidic device consisted of three PMMA plateshaving M shaped microchannels. The middle PMMA plate provideda ?ow path for sample solution and was in contact with twoTable 1Atomic spectrophotometric and UVeVis spectrophotometric techniques coupled with hollow ?ber based extraction techniques for heavy metals determination.LODaEF/PFb LRc0.2 mg/L0.08 ng/mL7902803 ng/mLKronenether þ oleic acidRice, milk, waterEnvironmental watersamplesEnvironmental watersamplesBlood, urine samplesDEHPDEHP þ 1-octanolTap water0.001e0.002 ng/mL0.5 mg/LEMEPANIPANI þ 1-octanolCr(VI)HFLPMEPbCr (VI)mEMEHgHFLPMEMethyltrialkylammoniumchlorideCTABTetra alkyl ammoniumchlorideDDTCMethyltrialkylammoniumchloride þ 1-octanolCTAB þ 1-octanolTetra alkyl ammoniumchlorideþ 1-octanolDDTC þ tolueneSpring, sea anddistilled waterDrinking, mineral andtap waterBlood samplesWastewater samplesCr (VI)EME1,5-diphenylcarbazideNPOECr (VI)EMECalix[4]areneNPOE þ calix[4]areneHgEMEDEHP1-octanolRiver, tap water and?sh sample0.7e12 mg/kg 130e176AuEMEPAN1-octanol4.5 mg/L200EMEDEHPDEHP þ 1-octanolTap, river and groundwaterPlasma, water2.3e950 mg/L forwater and40e9500 mg/kg for?sh sample20e2000 mg/L1.47 mg/L1514.9e800 mg/LMetal/AnalytePreconcentratio/Separation methodComplexing agent/Carrier SLM compositionAtomic spectroscopictechniquesPbAsHFSLPMEHFLPMETiO2APDCTiO2 þ Caprylic acidTriton X-100Cr (VI)IEMEd1-octanolPbHFLPMEKronenetherHgEMECr(VI)UVevisiblespectrometryBiþ3CM-HFLPMEInstrumentaltechnique modeRef.0.6e3000 mg/mL0.4e12 ng/mLFAASFAAS[51][52]2310e600 ng/mLFAAS[53]18.7e21.31e50 ng/mLGFAAS[54]0.5e10 mg/LGFAAS[55]0.02 ng/mL102e1081060.02e2.0 ng/mLETAAS[56]3 mg/Ld10e90 mg/LRGB/ ICP-AES[57]0.1 ng/mL0.06 ng/mL339.11e200 ng/mL0.5e14 ng/mLETAASETAAS[58][59]1030.5e7.5ETAAS[60]8010e80 mg/L[61]ddUVevisspectrometryUVevisspectrometryUVevisspectrometryUVevisspectrometryUVevisspectrometry[64]Water and freshwater 0.143?shEnvironmental water 2.3e7 mg/LsamplesIndustrial waterd[62][63]W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122Real applicationsInstrumentaltechniques[65]EME: Electro-membrane extraction, HFLPME: Hollow ?ber liquid phase microextraction, IEME: In-tube electro-membrane extraction, CM-HFLPME: carrier-mediated hollow ?ber liquid phase microextraction, DEHP: bis(2ethylhexyl) phosphate, CTAB: N,N,N-cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide, APDC: Ammonium pyrroldinedithiocarbamate, PANI: Polyanniline, DDTC: Diethyldithiocarbamate, PAN: 1-(2-pyridylazo)-2-naphthol), NPOE: 2nitrophenyl octyl ether, FAAS: Flame atomic absorption spectroscopy, GFAAS: Graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry, ETV-ICP-OES: Electrothermal vaporization inductive couple plasma optical emission spectroscopy, RGB/ ICP-AES: Red Green Blue Analysis/ inductive couple plasma atomic emission spectroscopy.aLimit of detection.bEnrichment factor/Pre-concentration factor.cLinear range.115116Table 2High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) technique coupled with hollow ?ber based extraction techniques for pharmaceutical drugs.Preconcentration/SeparationmethodMembrane /SLM compositionRealapplicationsLODaEF/PFbLRcInstrumental tec.Ref.Atenolol, betaxolol, propranololAmoxicillin, nicotinic acid,hippuric acid, salicylic acid,anthranilic acid, ketoprofen,naproxen, ibuprofenEpinephrine, norepinephrinedopamineTetracycline, chlortetracycline,doxycycline, oxytetracycline2-methyl hippuric acid, 3methyl hippuric acid, 4methyl hippuric acidHippuric acid, mandelic acid54 careproducts þ pharmaceuticaldrugsPramipexoleHaloperidol, loperamide,methadone, nortriptyline,pethidineCodeine, naloxone, naltrexoneRivastigmine, verapamil,amlodipine, morphineNicotinic acid, amoxicillin,hippuric acid, salicylic acidMicro?uidic EMEEMENPOE þ DEHP þ TEHPChitosan membrane ¼ 60%chitosan þ 40%Aliquat®336 / 1-octanolUrine, plasmaUrine4e10 mg/Lddd10e850 mg/LdHPLC-UVHPLC-DAD[66][67]Complexationmediate-EME, EMEHF-DLLMETFPBA þ DEHPiUrine1.8e5 mg/L2.2e6dHPLC-UV-MS[68]Aliquat-336 þ 1-octanolMilk0.95e3.6 mg/LddHPLC-UV[69]HFLPME1-octanolUrine2e3 mg/L210e31210e50,000 mg/LHPLC-UV[70]HF-LPMEHFLSPME1-octanol þ TBP1-octanol þ tolueneUrineFish, water0.007e0.009 mg/mL0.31e1.61 mg/kg172e1950.11e12.830.02e20 mg/LdHPLC-UVHPLC-MS[71][72]EMEEMERGO þ NPOENPOE, TBPWater and urine samplesd0.04 and 0.14 ng/mLd301 and 265d0.13e1000 ng/mLdHPLC-UVHPLC-UV[73][74]PEMEEMEDEHP þ NPOEAgarose gel as SLMPlasma, urineWastewater2e10 mg/L1.5e1.8 ng/mLdd10.e500 mg/L5e1000 ng/mLHPLC-UVHPLC-UV[75][76]EMEUrine samples112e402.3 mg/Ld173.3e4000 mg/LHPLC-DAD[77]Ephedrine, clonidineImipramine, amitriptyline,chlorpromazineOn chip-EMEmEMEUrine, plasmaRiver and tap water<11 mg/L0.1e0.4 mg/L12e19110e15010e500 mg/L1.0e1000 mg/LHPLC-UVHPLC-UV[78][79]Ibuprofen, sodium diclofenacKetoprofen, diclofenac,ibuprofen, mefenamic acidVerapamil, Haloperidol,rivastigmine, clomipramineVarious drugs and othercontaminantsKetoprofen, ibuprofen,naproxen, diclofenacPropranolol, carvedilol,verapamil, amlodipineSalicylic acid, ketoprofen,naproxen, ibuprofen,anthranilic acid, nicotinicacid, amoxicillin, hippuricacidPseudoephedrine, lidocaine,propranololZolpidemIndoprofen, ketoprofen,naproxen, ibuprofenValproic acidEMEEMEAcrylic nano?bersmembrane/Aliquat®336 þ 1-octanolDEHP þ NPOEAgarose ?lm as membrane /1-hexyl-3methylimidazoliumhexa?uorophosphateC60 fullerene þ 1-octanolAgarose ?lm / 1-octanolUrineRiver and tap water9e10 ng/mL0.14e0.42166e18862e8615e500 ng/mL0.5e500HPLC-UVHPLC-UV[80][81]CF-EME2-ethylhexanolWastewater and urine samples2.4 ng/mL>448.0e500 ng/mLHPLC-UV[82]HFLPME1-octanolWater samples1.09e98.15 ng/L6e4177dUPLC-MS[83]HFLPMEDHEUrine1.6e4.3 mg/L43.2e96.85e500 mg/LHPLC-DAD[84]HFLPMECholine chloride þ 1phenylethanolPIM ¼ 29% CTA þ 71%Aliquat®336 / 1-octanolUrine, plasma, pharmaceuticalwastewaterUrine samples0.3e0.8 ng/mL110e1350.8e500 ng/mLHPLC-UV[85]18e100 mg/Ld61e500 mg/LHPLC-DAD[86]Breast milk, wastewater0.3e6.0 ng/mL23.1e29.51e200 ng/mLHPLC-UV[87]EMEEMEPolyacrylamide gel asmembrane2-ethylhexanol1-octanolPlasma, urineUrine3 ng/mL0.20e0.27 mg/mL75d10e1000 ng/mL0.68e8.4 mg/mLHPLC-UVHPLC-UV[88][89]EMEEME1-octanol2-ethylhexanolPlasmaWastewater, plasma, urine0.5 mg/mL3.3e5 mg/L>12598.89e130.30.5e10 mg/mL10e2000 mg/LHPLC-UVHPLC-UV[90][91]EMEEMEW.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122AnalyteAmlodipine, verapamil,clomipramineMetaraminol, benzamidine,sotalol, ephedrine,trimethoprim, pethidinehydrochloride, quetiapine,haloperidol, nortriptylinehydrochloride, methadonehydrochloride, loperamidehydrochlorideFive ?uoroquinolones and fourparabensSalicylic acid, naproxen,ketoprofen, diclofenac,ibuprofenNaproxen, verapamilVerapamil, riluzoleBarbital, phenobarbital,pentobarbitalCipro?oxacinNalmefene, diclofenacEzetimibe, simvastatinFosdano?oxacin, nor?oxacin,enro?oxacin, cipro?oxacinRaloxifene, ethinylestradiolPhthalate- and nitrilebased organic solventsPlasmadddHPLC-UV[92]mEME / LPME1-octanolUrine16e75 mg/LdHPLC-UV[93]HFLPMEHFLPME1-octanoln-dodecane þ TOPOUrine and plasmaUrine2.8 ng/mL0.3e0.6 mg/L170152e4110.25-10 and0.06e5 mg/mLrespectively50e2000 ng/mL0.9e200 mg/LHPLC-UVHPLC-UV[94][95]HFLPME1-octanolPlasma0.2 mg/mL1.5e130.2e2.0 mg/mLHPLC-DAD[96]HFSLPMEHFPLMEHFM-MI-MSPEEME1-octanol1-octanold1-octanol þ 2-ethylhexanol þ DEHP1-octanolUrineEnvironmental waterOrange or lemon peel samplesRabbit plasma0.02 mg/L3.1e11.2 ng/L0.004 mg/kg0.15 ng/mLd14e60dd0.01e10 mg/L0.05e5 mg/L0.02e2 mg/L0.5e1000 ng/mLHPLC-DADUHPLC-FLDHPLC-DADHPLC-PAD[97][98][99][100]Urine0.1e1.5 ng/mL85e1330.5e750 ng/mLHPLC-DAD/FLD[101]1-octanol, 2-ethylhexanolMixture of 2-ethyl hexanoland 1-otanol2-nonanoneLemon juice, soft drinksUrine, wastewaterd1.5e2.5 ng/mLd123.6e146.6d1.5e500 ng/mLHPLC-UVHPLC-UV[102][103]Blood, urine, liver0.6e10 ng/gd5e2500 ng/gHPLC-MS[104]BloodUrine1 mg/L3e4 mg/L8817e192e500 mg/L9.0e500 mg/LHPLC-UVHPLC-UV[105][106]CAeHFeSLPMEMIP-HFME1-octanolNPOE þ DEHP and 1octanolCetyl alcohol þ 1-octanolToluenePlasma, urineEnvironmental water, urine0.363e0.49 mg/L0.1e10 mg/Ldd0.3363e25 mg/LdHPLC-DADHPLC-MS[107][108]HFLPME1-octanol þ CTABPharmaceutical waste water5e10 mg/L53e8620e5000 mg/LHPLC-UV[109]EMEEMEEMEFMLPMEOn chip PEMEOn chip-EMEHFDLLME: Hollow ?ber dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction, HFLSPME: Hollow ?ber liquid solid phase microextraction, PEME: Pulsed electromembrane extraction, CF-EME: Continuous-?ow electromembrane extraction,LPME: Liquid phase microextraction, HFM-MI-MSPE: Hollow ?ber membrane-molecular imprinted-micro solid phase microextraction, FMLPE: Flat membrane based liquid phase microextraction, CAeHFeSLPME: Cetyl-alcoholreinforced hollow ?ber solid/ liquid phase microextraction, MIP-HFME: Molecular imprinted polymer hollow ?ber microextraction, DEHPi: Bis(2-ethylhexyl) phosphite, TFPBA: 4-(tri?uoromethyl)phenylboronic acid, RGO:Reduced graphene oxide, TBP: Tributyl phosphate, DHE: Dihexyl ether, PIM: Polymer inclusion membrane, TOPO: Trioctylphosphine oxide HPLC-UV: High performance liquid chromatography with UV detector, HPLC-MS: Highperformance liquid chromatography with mass spectrometry, HPLC-DAD-FLD: High performance liquid chromatography with diode array detector and ?uorescence detector, HPLC-UV-MS: High performance liquid chromatography with UV detector and mass spectrometry, UHPLC-MS: Ultra high performance liquid chromatography with mass spectrometry, HPLC-DAD: High performance liquid chromatography with diode array detector,Fluorometer/RGB/ HPLC-UV: Fluorometer/ Red Green Blue analysis/ High performance liquid chromatography with UV detector.aLimit of detection.bEnrichment factor/Pre-concentration factor.cLinear range.W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122DiclofenacExemestane, letrozole,paclitaxelOmeprazole, pantoprazole,lansoprazolePhenazopyridineDifferent sulfonamidesThiabendazoleLeuprolide, triptorelinEME117118Table 3Gas chromatography, Capillary electrophoresis and Voltammetric techniques coupled with Hollow ?ber based extraction techniques for determination of pharmaceutical drugs.DrugPreconcentration/Separation methodSLM þ/Carrier/FLM/MembraneReal applicationsLODaEF/PF/EFbLRcInstrumentaltechnique modeRef.GaschromatographyCyproheptadine, ketotifenEM-SPMENPOEWater, urine, plasma01e1.1 ng/mLdGC-FID[110]Trimipramine, clomipramineClomipramine, imipramineNort [112]riptyline, papaverine,haloperidolNortriptyline, haloperidol,loperamide, ketoprofen,naproxenImatinibmesylateG-EME/DLLMEEME-EALLMEmEMEAgarose gel2-ethylhexanolENBUrineUrine, wastewaterUrine, plasma1.0e3.0 ng/L0.15 ng/mL0.15 mg/L260e370770.3d0.3e200 and0.5e750 ng/mL3.5e1000 ng/mL0.5e750 ng/mL1e20 mg/LGC-FIDGC-FIDCE-UV[111][112][113]EMEENBUrine0.075e1.5 mg/mLd1e40 mg/mLCE-DAD[114]EMEPlasma6.24 ng/mL7825e1500 ng/mLCE-UV[115]Nortriptyline, papaverineAmitriptyline, haloperidol,bupivacaine, propranololMethadone, methamphetamine,tramadolTramadol, pseudoephedrineCapecitabine, 5-FluorouracilTranylcypromineIbuprofen, naproxen, ketoprofen,diclofenacNortriptyline, papaverine,haloperidoland loperamideIbuprofen, diclofenac, naproxen,ketoprofen, salicylic acidAmlodipinemEMEPa-EMENPOE þ MWCNT/ZnO coated by1-octyl-3-methylimidazoliumbromideionic liquid4-nitrocumeneNPOEUrinePlasma0.15 mg/mLddd0.5e10 mg/mLdCE-UVCE-UV[116][117]EMENPOE þ MIL-110(Cr)Urine, plasma0.30e0.91 mg/L132e1901e1000 mg/LCE-UV[118]EMEHF-SLPMES/EMEmEMENPOE þ span 801-octanolNPOE1-octanol2.10e4.50 mg/L6.4e9.3 ng/mL3.03e6.06 ng/mL4e20 ng/mL160e188d166e20318e29.15e2000 mg/L25e1000 ng/mL10e1000 ng/mL50e2500 ng/mLCE-UVCE-UVCE-UVCE-UV[119][120][121][122]SLM extractionENBUrinePlasmaUrine, waterUrine, serum,wastewaterUrine, plasma0.02e0.15 mg/mLd0.5e30 mg/mLCE-UV[123]On chip-EMEUndecanol þ NPOEUrine0.07e5 mg/mLddCE/HPLC-DA[124]EMENPOEWhole blood0.05 ng/mL61FFSSWV[125]DiclofenecImatinibEstradiol valerateEMEHFSPMEEME1-octanold1-octanolWhole bloodSerum, urineWhole blood1 ng/mL7.39 103 mmol/L0.01 ng/mLdd2SFFTCCVDPVFFTSWV[126][127][128]PropylthiouracilImipramineEMEEMENitrobenzene þ CuNPsNPOEUrineUrine, whole blood0.02 mg/mL0.001e0.01 ng/mL20035e54DPVFFTSWV[129][130]Vanillylmandelic acidHFLPMEButyl benzoateUrine0.5 mmol/Ld0.1e10 and10e1000 ng/mL5e1000 ng/mL0.010e200 mmol/L0.1e1300 and1300e10,000 ng/mL0.5e5 mg/mL0.02e1000 and0.2e1000 ng/mL0.5e100 mmol/LDPV[131]CapillaryelectrophoresisVoltammetryEME-EALLME: Electromembrane extraction and electro-assisted liquid-liquid microextraction, EM-SPME: Electromembrane surrounded solid phase microextraction, G-EME/DLLME: Gel-electromembrane exraction / dispersiveliquid-liquid microextraction, Pa-EME: Parallel electromembrane extraction, ENB: 1-ethyl-2-nitrobenzene, MWCNTs: Multi-walled carbon nanotubes, MIL-110(Cr): Chromium terephthalate metal-organic framework, Span-80:Mono-(9Z)-9-octadecenoate, CuNPs: Copper nanoparticles, GC-FID: Gas chromatography with ?ame ionization detector,CE-UV: Capillary electrophoresis with UV detector, CE-DAD: Capillary electrophoresis with diode arraydetector, FFSSWV: Fast Fourier transform stripping square wave voltammetry, SFFTCCV: Stripping fast Fourier transform continuous cyclic voltammetry, DPV: Differential pulse voltammetry, FFTSWV: Fast Fourier transformsquare wave voltammetry.aLimit of detection.bEnrichment factor.cLinear range.W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122Instrumental techniqueW.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122different SLMs and acceptor phases. A stainless steel electrode wasembedded in the middle plate, dedicated for the ?ow of samplesolution. Stainless steel electrodes were also embedded in the twoPMMA plates dedicated for the two acceptor phases. Based ondifferent SLMs, drugs of different hydrophobicity were extractedinto two acceptor phases and analyzed with HPLC-UV [66].n-Hidalgo et al. introduced a newIn another example, Romabiopolymeric membrane for EME of NSAIDs and acidic compounds.The chitosan biopolymeric membrane was synthesized by mixingchitosan 60% (w/w) and Aliquat®336 40% (w/w). The synthesizedmembrane was characterized with scanning electron microscopy(SEM). The prepared membrane was impregnated with a suitableorganic solvent and used as SLM in a home-made device. After EME,the acceptor phase was analyzed with HPLC-DAD for quantitativeanalysis [67]. Table 2 summarizes examples on research combininghollow ?ber based extraction techniques with HPLC [66e109].4.2.2. Gas chromatography (GC)GC has been coupled with two-phase HF-LPME and EME foranalysis of neutral, low and medium polar analytes. In two phasesystems the acceptor solution is the same organic solvent as usedfor impregnation of membrane. Due to the fact that the acceptorphase is organic, it can be injected directly in GC [109]. An EMESPME technique were introduced by Shamsayei et al. [110] for theextraction and determination of cyproheptadine and ketotifen. Inthis work, the surface of a stainless steel wire was electrochemicallydeposited with polypyrrole and manganese dioxide using cyclicvoltammetry. A segment of polypropylene membrane wasimpregnated with a suitable organic solvent and ?lled with wateras an acceptor phase. The prepared SPME ?ber (electrochemicallyprepared stainless steel wire) was introduced into the membraneand used as a cathode. The cathode comprising the SLM and theacceptor solution was directed into donor solution. A platinumanode was directed into the sample solution. After EME, the SPME?ber was analyzed with GC [110].Similarly Tabani et al. presented a new approach to preconcentration and determination of basic drugs. An agarose gelEME method was combined with dispersive liquideliquid microextraction (DLLME) technique. For extraction of target analytes, anagarose-based gel membrane was synthesized and used for EME.After EME, acceptor phase was collected and mixed with 1 mMNaOH solution. DLLME was carried out from this solution and the?nal organic extract was analyzed with GC [111]. Table 3 summarizes information on research combining HF-LPME and EME withGC [110e131].4.2.3. Capillary electrophoresis (CE)CE is another analytical instrument which has frequently beencoupled with three-phase HF-LPME and EME [30]. To avoid bandbroadening (de-stacking), the ionic strength of the acceptor phaseshould not exceed the ionic strength of the CE separation bufferk et al. presented a new semi-automated-mEME tech[132]. Dvoranique for extraction of drugs coupled with CE. A three phasedisposable microextraction unit was constructed, in which a freeliquid membrane was sandwiched between acceptor and donorphases. All liquid samples (acceptor phase, FLM, and donor phase)were handled with a programmable syringe pump. After EME, theacceptor phase was collected by switching the syringe pump toinfusion mode. The collected acceptor phase was quantitativelyanalyzed with CE [113]. et al. investigated the effect of membrane thickness onRysavathe extraction ef?ciency in EME [123]. Three polypropylenemembranes with different thickness were used as SLMs for EMEpreconcentration of basic drugs. In this experiment, it wasconcluded that the transfer of analytes across the membrane is119inversely proportional to the membrane thickness. Recent studiesof EME and HF-LPME coupled with CE are mentioned in Table 3[113e124].4.2.4. VoltammetryOne of the most important and widely used electroanalyticaltechniques is voltammetry [133], and for quanti?cation of heavymetals anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV) has been combinedwith HF-LPME. The major advantage of ASV over other voltammetric techniques is the step of pre-concentration onto the electrode surface [134]. Anodic stripping voltammetry has lowdetection limits, high sensitivity and selectivity as compared toother electrochemical techniques. Detection limits with anodicstripping voltammetry of heavy metals are in the ppm range [135].To the best of our knowledge (2017 to May-2019), there is only oneresearch article on voltammetric instrumental technique forquanti?cation of heavy metals using HF-LPME or EME preconcentration. For pharmaceuticals, several new approaches based onhollow ?ber based techniques have been reported. In one example,Hrdlicka et al. presented an HF-LPME method for extraction anddetermination of vanillylmandelic acid combined with DPV. In thisstudy, a 20 mm polypropylene hollow ?ber membrane was soakedin an organic solvent to impregnate the pores. The excess organicsolvent was removed by air with a syringe. The lumen of the ?berwas ?lled with acceptor phase and sealed in both ends. The prepared membrane was fully immersed in sample solution and stirred with a magnetic bar. After EME, the acceptor phase wascollected and transferred to the surface of working electrode forDPV analysis [131].Tahmasebi et al. reported a novel approach in EME for preconcentration and determination of propylthiouracil coupled withDPV. CuNPs were synthesized for selective extraction of propylthiouracil, and coated on hollow ?ber membrane. The coated CuNPsincreased mass transfer and selectivity of propylthiouracil due tothe high selectivity of CuNPs toward thiol group/sulfhydryl compounds. The high af?nity/selectivity of propylthiouracil towardsCuNPs was explained by the hard and soft acid-base theory. It wasconcluded that nitrobenzene was the best choice for propylthiouracil extraction because alcoholic solvents such as 1-octanol and2-ethylhexanol dissolved CuNPs. It was pointed out that thisapproach was not applicable for acidic compounds [129]. Researchcombining HF-LPME and EME with voltammetry is summarized inTable 3 [125e131].5. Conclusions and looking into the futureSince 1999, a larger number of reports have been published onthe development of HF-LPME. These efforts have documented HFLPME as a green sample preparation technique requiring only afew microliters of organic solvent per sample. HF-LPME enableshigh enrichment and excellent sample clean-up from biological andenvironmental samples. In the three-phase mode, HF-LPME provides aqueous extracts which are directly injectable in HPLC. Due tothe protection of the acceptor phase by the SLM, HF-LPME isamenable to highly complex samples such as plasma, whole blood,urine, saliva, breast milk, tap water, surface water, pond water,seawater, and soil slurries. HF-LPME shows great potential forroutine applications, but to enter this area commercial productsand automation are required. Also, generic methods have to bedeveloped to simplify method development.EME has been developed in parallel to HF-LPME, but EME is lessmature. Although, EME provides the same advantages as HF-LPME,the electrical ?eld open for additional perspectives. Thus, theextraction is controlled by an external electrical ?eld, and selectivity may be tuned by the direction and magnitude of the electrical. Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 102e108Contents lists available at ScienceDirectJournal of Pharmaceutical Analysisjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jpaReview paperMolecular immune pathogenesis and diagnosis of COVID-19Xiaowei Li a, b, Manman Geng a, b, Yizhao Peng a, b, Liesu Meng a, b, *, Shemin Lu a, b, *aDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Xi’an Jiaotong University Health Science Center, Xi’an, Shaanxi,710061, ChinabKey Laboratory of Environment and Genes Related to Diseases, Ministry of Education, Xi’an, Shaanxi, 710061, Chinaa r t i c l e i n f oa b s t r a c tArticle history:Received 24 February 2020Received in revised form1 March 2020Accepted 1 March 2020Available online 5 March 2020Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a kind of viral pneumonia which is caused by severe acuterespiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 has been marked asthe third introduction of a highly pathogenic coronavirus into the human population after the severeacute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in the twenty-?rst century. In this minireview, we provide a brief introduction of thegeneral features of SARS-CoV-2 and discuss current knowledge of molecular immune pathogenesis,diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19 on the base of the present understanding of SARS-CoV and MERSCoV infections, which may be helpful in offering novel insights and potential therapeutic targets forcombating the SARS-CoV-2 infection.© 2020 Xi'an Jiaotong University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access articleunder the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Keywords:CoronavirusSARS-CoV-2SARS-CoVMERS-CoVPathogenesis1. IntroductionNovel coronavirus-induced pneumonia, which was named ascoronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) by the WHO on the February11, 2020, has rapidly increased in epidemic scale [1]. On the sameday, the international virus classi?cation commission announcedthat the novel coronavirus was named as severe acute respiratorysyndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). COVID-19 is not the ?rstsevere respiratory disease outbreak caused by the coronavirus. Justin the past two decades, coronaviruses have caused three epidemicdiseases, namely, COVID-19, severe acute respiratory syndrome(SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) [2]. At present, the cases of COVID-19 have been found in many countriesaround the world [3]. According to the latest data, up to the March1, 2020, the number of con?rmed cases in China reached 79,968, ofwhich 2,873 were dead, and 41,681 were cured. In addition toChina, the number of con?rmed cases in other countries alsoreached 7,041, of which 105 were dead, and 459 were cured. On the31st of January 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO)Peer review under responsibility of Xi’an Jiaotong University.* Corresponding authors at: Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,School of Basic Medical Sciences, Xi’an Jiaotong University Health Science Center,Xi’an, Shaanxi, 710061, China.E-mail addresses: mengliesu@xjtu.edu.cn (L. Meng), lushemin@xjtu.edu.cn(S. Lu).announced that COVID-19 was listed as the Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), meaning that it may poserisks to multiple countries and requires a coordinated internationalresponse. The review tries to explain the molecular immunepathogenesis and diagnosis of COVID-19 and provide a referencefor the prevention and drug development of SARS-CoV-2 infection,based on the recent research progress of SARS-CoV-2 and theknowledge from researches on SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV.2. Virology of SARS-CoV-2Coronaviruses are enveloped viruses with a positive sensesingle-stranded RNA genome (26e32 kb) [4]. Four coronavirusgenera (a, b, g, d) have been identi?ed so far, with human coronaviruses (HCoVs) detected in the a coronavirus (HCoV-229E andNL63) and b coronavirus (MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV, HCoV-OC43 andHCoV-HKU1) genera [5]. In late December 2019, patients presenting with cough, fever, and dyspnea with acute respiratory distresssyndrome (ARDS) due to an unidenti?ed microbial infection werereported in Wuhan, China. Virus genome sequencing of ?ve patients with pneumonia hospitalized from December 18 toDecember 29, 2019, revealed the presence of a previously unknownb-CoV strain in all of them [6]. This isolated novel b-CoV shows 88%identity to the sequence of two bat-derived severe acute respiratory syndromes (SARS)-like coronaviruses, bat-SL-CoVZC45 andbat-SL-CoVZXC21, and about 50% identity to the sequence of MERS-https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpha.2020.03.0012095-1779/© 2020 Xi'an Jiaotong University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).X. Li et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 102e108CoV [6]. The novel b-CoV was then named “SARS-CoV-2” by theInternational Virus Classi?cation Commission. The phylogenetictree of SARS-like coronaviruses complete genome sequences is103clearly depicted in Fig. 1A.The genome of SARS-CoV-2 is similar to that of typical CoVs andcontains at least ten open reading frames (ORFs). The ?rst ORFsFig. 1. The phylogenetic tree of SARS-like coronaviruses complete genome sequences and genome of SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARSCoV- 2.(A) This phylogeny shows evolution of SARS-like b-coronaviruses including samples from human (n ¼ 20), bat (n ¼ 22), civet (n ¼ 3) and pangolin (n ¼ 6). The phylogenetic tree ofcomplete genome sequences of coronaviruses was obtained and analyzed with Nextstrain (https://github.com/blab/sars-like-cov). (B) Coronaviruses form enveloped and sphericalparticles of 100e160 nm in diameter. They contain a positivesense single stranded RNA (ssRNA) genome of 26e32 kb in size. In SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, the 50 terminal two-thirds of the genome ORF1a/b encodes polyproteins, which form the viral replicase transcriptase complex. The other ORFs on the one-third of the genome encode fourmain structural proteins: spike (S), envelope (E), nucleocapsid (N) and membrane (M) proteins, as well as several accessory proteins.104X. Li et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 102e108(ORF1a/b), about two-thirds of viral RNA, are translated into twolarge polyproteins. In SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, two polyproteins,pp1a and pp1ab, are processed into 16 non-structural proteins(nsp1-nsp16), which form the viral replicase transcriptase complex[7]. Those nsps rearrange membranes originating from the roughendoplasmic reticulum (RER) into double-membrane vesicleswhere viral replication and transcription occur [8,9]. The otherORFs of SARS-CoV-2 on the one-third of the genome encode fourmain structural proteins: spike (S), envelope (E), nucleocapsid (N)and membrane (M) proteins, as well as several accessory proteinswith unknown functions which do not participate in viral replication (Fig. 1B).Several groups of scientists in China have all discovered thatSARS-CoV-2, just like SARS-CoV, requires the angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ACE2) [1] as a receptor to enter cells [10].The binding of the virus with host cell receptors is a signi?cantdeterminant for the pathogenesis of infection. SARS-CoV mostlikely originated in bats [11]and adapted to non-bat ACE2 variantsas it crossed species to infect humans [12]. Dipeptidyl peptidase 4(DPP4, also known as CD26) was identi?ed as a functional receptorfor MERS-CoV, because the receptor-binding S1 domain of theMERS-CoV spike protein was copuri?ed with DPP4 speci?cally fromlysates of susceptible Huh-7 cells [13]. MERS-CoV can bind DPP4from multiple species, which promotes the transmission to humansand other species, and infection of cells from a large number ofspecies [14]. A better understanding of the relative effects of receptor binding and protease action will help predict whether speci?c zoonotic coronaviruses infect humans and the possibility ofadaptation.vesicles containing the virus particles then fuse with the plasmamembrane to release the virus [2].3.2. Antigen presentation in coronavirus infectionWhile the virus enters the cells, its antigen will be presented tothe antigen presentation cells(APC), which is a central part of thebody’s anti-viral immunity. Antigenic peptides are presented bymajor histocompatibility complex (MHC; or human leukocyte antigen (HLA) in humans) and then recognized by virus-speci?ccytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). Hence, the understanding of antigen presentation of SARS-CoV-2 will help our comprehension ofCOVID-19 pathogenesis. Unfortunately, there is still lack of anyreport about it, and we can only get some information from previous researches on SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. The antigen presentation of SARS-CoV mainly depends on MHC I molecules [24],but MHC II also contributes to its presentation. Previous researchshows numerous HLA polymorphisms correlate to the susceptibility of SARS-CoV, such as HLA-B*4601, HLA-B*0703, HLA-DRB1*1202 [25] and HLA-Cw*0801 [26], whereas the HLA-DR0301,HLA-Cw1502 and HLA-A*0201 alleles are related to the protection from SARS infection [27]. In MERS-CoV infection, MHC IImolecules, such as HLA-DRB1*11:01 and HLA-DQB1*02:0, areassociated with the susceptibility to MERS-CoV infection [28]. Besides, gene polymorphisms of MBL (mannose-binding lectin)associated with antigen presentation are related to the risk of SARSCoV infection [29]. These researches will provide valuable clues forthe prevention, treatment, and mechanism of COVID-19.3.3. Humoral and cellular immunity3. Pathogenesis of COVID-19Patients with COVID-19 show clinical manifestations includingfever, nonproductive cough, dyspnea, myalgia, fatigue, normal ordecreased leukocyte counts, and radiographic evidence of pneumonia [15], which are similar to the symptoms of SARS-CoV andMERS-CoV infections [16]. Hence, although the pathogenesis ofCOVID-19 is poorly understood, the similar mechanisms of SARSCoV and MERS-CoV still can give us a lot of information on thepathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 infection to facilitate our recognitionof COVID-19.3.1. Coronavirus entry and replicationCoronavirus S protein has been reported as a signi?cant determinant of virus entry into host cells [2]. The envelope spikeglycoprotein binds to its cellular receptor, ACE2 for SARS-CoV [10]and SARS-CoV-2 [17], CD209L(a C-type lectin, also called L-SIGN)for SARS-CoV [18], DPP4 for MERS-CoV [13]. The entry of SARS-CoVinto cells was initially identi?ed to be accomplished by directmembrane fusion between the virus and plasma membrane [19].Belouzard et al. [20] found that a critical proteolytic cleavage eventoccurred at SARS-CoV S protein at position (S20 ) mediated themembrane fusion and viral infectivity. MERS-CoV also has evolvedan abnormal two-step furin activation for membrane fusion [21].Besides membrane fusion, the clathrin-dependent and -independent endocytosis mediated SARS-CoV entry too [22,23]. After thevirus enters the cells, the viral RNA genome is released into thecytoplasm and is translated into two polyproteins and structuralproteins, after which the viral genome begins to replicate [5]. Thenewly formed envelope glycoproteins are inserted into the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum or Golgi, and the nucleocapsidis formed by the combination of genomic RNA and nucleocapsidprotein. Then, viral particles germinate into the endoplasmicreticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC). At last, theAntigen presentation subsequently stimulates the body’s humoral and cellular immunity, which are mediated by virus-speci?cB and T cells. Similar to common acute viral infections, the antibodypro?le against SARS-CoV virus has a typical pattern of IgM and IgGproduction. The SARS-speci?c IgM antibodies disappear at the endof week 12, while the IgG antibody can last for a long time, whichindicates IgG antibody may mainly play a protective role [30], andthe SARS-speci?c IgG antibodies primarily are S-speci?c and Nspeci?c antibodies [2]. Comparing to humoral responses, there aremore researches on the cellular immunity of coronavirus. The latestreport shows the number of CD4þ and CD8þ T cells in the peripheral blood of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients signi?cantly is reduced,whereas its status is excessive activation, as evidenced by highproportions of HLA-DR (CD4 3.47%) and CD38 (CD8 39.4%) doublepositive fractions [31]. Similarly, the acute phase response in patients with SARS-CoV is associated with severe decrease of CD4þ Tand CD8þ T cells. Even if there is no antigen, CD4þ and CD8þmemory T cells can persist for four years in a part of SARS-CoVrecovered individuals and can perform T cell proliferation, DTHresponse and production of IFN-g [32]. Six years after SARS-CoVinfection, speci?c T-cell memory responses to the SARS-CoV Speptide library could still be identi?ed in 14 of 23 recovered SARSpatients [33]. The speci?c CD8þ T cells also show a similar effect onMERS-CoV clearance in mice [34]. These ?ndings may providevaluable information for the rational design of vaccines againstSARS-CoV-2.3.4. Cytokine storm in COVID-19The report in Lancet shows ARDS is the main death cause ofCOVID-19. Of the 41 SARS-CoV-2-infected patients admitted in theearly stages of the outbreak, six died from ARDS [15]. ARDS is thecommon immunopathological event for SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoVand MERS-CoV infections [31]. One of the main mechanisms forX. Li et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 102e108ARDS is the cytokine storm, the deadly uncontrolled systemic in?ammatory response resulting from the release of large amounts ofpro-in?ammatory cytokines (IFN-a, IFN-g, IL-1b, IL-6, IL-12, IL-18,IL-33, TNF-a, TGFb, etc.) and chemokines (CCL2, CCL3, CCL5,CXCL8, CXCL9, CXCL10, etc.) by immune effector cells in SARS-CoVinfection [15,35e37]. Similar to those with SARS-CoV, individualswith severe MERS-CoV infection show elevated levels of IL-6, IFN-a,and CCL5, CXCL8, CXCL-10 in serum compared to those with themild-moderate disease [38]. The cytokine storm will trigger a violent attack by the immune system to the body, cause ARDS andmultiple organ failure, and ?nally lead to death in severe cases ofSARS-CoV-2 infection, just like what occurs in SARS-CoV and MERSCoV infection [31].3.5. Coronavirus immune evasionTo better survive in host cells, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV usemultiple strategies to avoid immune responses. The evolutionarilyconserved microbial structures called pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) can be recognized by pattern recognitionreceptors (PRRs). However, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV can inducethe production of double-membrane vesicles that lack PRRs andthen replicate in these vesicles, thereby avoiding the host detectionof their dsRNA [39]. IFN-I(IFN-a and IFN-b) has a protective effecton SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infection, but the IFN-I pathway isinhibited in infected mice [40,41]. Accessory protein 4a of MERSCoV may block the induction of IFN at the level of MDA5 activation through direct interaction with double-stranded RNA [42].Besides, ORF4a, ORF4b, ORF5, and membrane proteins of MERSCoV inhibit nuclear transport of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) andactivation of IFN b promoter [43]. The antigen presentation can alsobe affected by the coronavirus. For example, gene expressionrelated to antigen presentation is down-regulated after MERS-CoVinfection [44]. Therefore, destroying the immune evasion of SARSCoV-2 is imperative in its treatment and speci?c drug development.4. Diagnosis of COVID-19Clinical diagnosis of COVID-19 is mainly based on epidemiological history, clinical manifestations and some auxiliary examinations, such as nucleic acid detection, CT scan, immuneidenti?cation technology (Point-of-care Testing (POCT) of IgM/IgG,enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)) and blood culture.However, the clinical symptoms and signs of patients infected withSARS-CoV-2 are highly atypical, including respiratory symptoms,cough, fever, dyspnea, and viral pneumonia. Therefore, auxiliaryexaminations are necessary for the diagnosis of COVID-19, just asthe epidemiological history.4.1. Nucleic acid detection technologyThe two commonly used nucleic acid detection technologies forSARS-CoV-2 are real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction(RT-qPCR) and high-throughput sequencing. The authoritativeidenti?cation method for SARS-CoV-2 is virus blood culture andhigh-throughput sequencing of the whole genome [1]. However,the application of high-throughput sequencing technology inclinical diagnosis is limited because of its equipment dependencyand high cost. So RT-qPCR is the most common, effective andstraightforward method for detecting pathogenic viruses in respiratory secretions and blood [45].After the outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 in China, many companiessoon launched RT-qPCR test kits for clinical diagnosis. The ChineseCenter for Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC) recommends the use of speci?c primers and probes in the ORF1ab and N105gene regions for SARS-CoV-2 detection by RT-qPCR. The patient isde?ned as having a laboratory-con?rmed infection when bothtargetsarepositive(http://ivdc.chinacdc.cn/kyjz/202001/t20200121_211337.html). Chu et al. [46] described two 1-step RTqPCR assays (TaqMan-based ?uorescence signal) to detect twodifferent regions (ORF1b and N) of the viral genome separately. Thenegative control samples were all con?rmed as negative ones,while samples from two SARS-CoV-2 infected patients werecon?rmed as positive ones in respiratory specimens by thismethod. Another study showed that the positive rate of SARS-CoV2 was 91.7% (11/12) in the patients’ self-collected saliva by using RTqPCR (non-probes SYBR based ?uorescence signal), which suggeststhat saliva is a promising non-invasive specimen for the diagnosis,monitoring, and infection control of patients with SARS-CoV-2infection [47]. RT-qPCR detection also showed high sensitivityand speci?city for SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infection [48]. However, ?ve patients with negative results of RT-qPCR for SARS-CoV-2may present with positive chest CT ?ndings, and repeated swabtests (RT-qPCR) eventually con?rmed that all patients were infected by SARS-CoV-2 [49]. The detection of SARS-CoV using RT-qPCRcan only achieve a sensitivity of 50%e79%, depending on the protocol used the sample type and number of clinical specimenscollected [50]. Thus, it is essential to improve the detection rate ofRT-qPCR for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Besides, RT-qPCR has someother shortcomings, including certain biological safety hazardsbrought by the retention and operation of patient samples,cumbersome nucleic acid detection operations, and long waitingtime for results.4.2. CT scans and other diagnostic methodsFor the diagnosis of COVID-19, although RT-qPCR is speci?c, itsfalse-negative rate cannot be ignored because of the severe consequences of missed diagnosis. So many clinicians proposed CTscans should be one necessary auxiliary diagnostic method becauseit is more sensitive. For individuals with a high clinical suspicion ofSARS-CoV-2 infection with negative RT-qPCR screening, a combination of repeated RT-qPCR tests and chest CT scan may be helpful.Especially the high-resolution CT (HRCT) for the chest is essentialfor early diagnosis and evaluation of disease severity of patientswith SARS-CoV-2 [51]. Several studies have analyzed chest CT images of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 [52,53]. The typical CTimages show bilateral pulmonary parenchymal ground-glass andconsolidative pulmonary opacities, sometimes with a roundedmorphology and a peripheral lung distribution. Lung involvementwith a peripheral predominance was also seen in patients withSARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infections, and the chest CT showed thatdisease progressed with ground-glass opacities and consolidation,which is similar to that of SARS-CoV-2 infection [54,55]. Accordingto those ?ndings, CT scans have a great clinical diagnostic value forCOVID-19, especially in the high prevalence area of SARS-CoV-2infection. However, CT scans also have some shortcomings, suchas indistinguishability from other viral pneumonia and the hysteresis of abnormal CT imaging.Given the shortcomings of the currently used nucleic aciddetection and CT scans for the diagnosis of COVID-19, clinical laboratories should apply some immunological detection kits thattarget viral antigens or antibodies as soon as possible. Currently,POCT of IgM/IgG and ELISA kits for SARS-CoV-2 have been developed and pre-tested by some companies and have shown higherdetection rates than nucleic acid detection, but there is still noproduct or published article. The sensitivity of SARS-CoV N-basedIgG ELISA (94.7%) is signi?cantly higher than that of SARS-CoV Sbased IgG ELISA (58.9%) [48], but the sensitivity of SARS-CoV-2 IgG/IgM remains to be studied. Hence, developing other sensitive and106X. Li et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 102e108speci?c auxiliary methods is necessary and urgent for the diagnosisof COVID-19.5. Current treatment strategies for COVID-19Just like SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV [2,56], there is currently noclinically proven speci?c antiviral agent available for SARS-CoV-2infection. The supportive treatment, including oxygen therapy,conservation ?uid management, and the use of broad-spectrumantibiotics to cover secondary bacterial infection, remains to bethe most important management strategy [15]. According to theresearch on molecular mechanisms of coronavirus infection [57]and the genomic organization of SARS-CoV-2 [6], there are severalpotential therapeutic targets to repurpose the existing antiviralagents or develop effective interventions against this novelcoronavirus.5.1. Virally targeted inhibitorsRemdesivir, an adenosine analogue that can target the RNAdependent RNA polymerase and block viral RNA synthesis, hasbeen a promising antiviral drug against a wide array of RNA viruses(including SARS/MERS-CoV) infections in cultured cells [58], mice[59] and nonhuman primate models [60,61]. The WashingtonDepartment of Health administrated remdesivir intravenously ?rstand found that remdesivir might have potential protection fromSARS-CoV-2 infection [62]. Then remdesivir and chloroquine havebeen demonstrated to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 effectively in vitro [63].Hence, other nucleoside analogues, such as favipiravir, ribavirin andgalidesivir [56,64], may be potentially clinically applicable againstSARS-CoV-2. Chymotrypsin-like (3C-like protease, 3CLpro) andpapain-like protease (PLP) are non-structural proteins, which havean essential function for coronaviral replication and can inhibit thehost innate immune responses [65]. So 3CLpro inhibitors, such ascinanserin [66] and ?avonoids [67], and PLP inhibitors, such asdiarylheptanoids [68], are other attractive choices to ?ght againstSARS-CoV-2. ACE2 mediates SARS-CoV-2 entry into the cell as afunctional receptor of coronaviruses. So blocking the binding of Sprotein with ACE2 is also a meaningful strategy against SARS-CoV-2infection [10].SARS-CoV-2.Currently, there may be many promising targets for SARS-CoV-2,but more laboratory and clinical evidence still should be explored.The WHO is working with Chinese scientists to launch more than80 clinical trials on potential treatments for SARS-CoV-2. Traditional Chinese medicine seems to have some effects in the supportive treatments. Some new pharmaceutical drugs, including HIVdrugs and stem cells, were testi?ed in those clinical trials.6. ConclusionIn conclusion, the occurrence and development of SARS-CoV-2depend on the interaction between the virus and the individual’simmune system. Viral factors include virus type, mutation, viralload, viral titer, and viability of the virus in vitro. The individual’simmune system factors include genetics (such as HLA genes), age,gender, nutritional status, neuroendocrine-immune regulation, andphysical status. These factors all contribute to whether an individual is infected with the virus, the duration and severity of thedisease, and the reinfection. In the early stages of the epidemic,accurate diagnosis helps control the spread of the disease. It isimperative to develop new, safe, accurate, fast and simple newtechnologies for detecting SARS-CoV-2. Of course, physicians willintentionally intervene in the two factors to make them developinto a direction bene?cial to human health, which can help patientsrecover as soon as possible. However, it must not be considered thatmedical intervention can achieve a 100% curative effect.Con?icts of interestThe authors declare that there are no con?icts of interest.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by the National Natural ScienceFoundation of China (project No.81970029) and FundamentalResearch Funds for the Central Universities of China (The Emergency Projects on COVID-19. project No.xzy032020042). Wesincerely thank the individuals who contributed to this workincluding Xudong Yang, Wenhua Zhu, Jing Xu, Fumeng Huang,Muhammad Saadiq Khan, Jiajun Ren, and Xipeng Wang.5.2. Antibody and plasma therapyAppendix A. Supplementary dataIt has also been reported that there are many convalescent patients donating plasma against SARS-CoV-2, just as SARS-CoV [69]and MERS-CoV [70] trials. It has preliminary acquired favorableresults in acute, severe SARS-CoV-2 patients.See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.Molecular Pharmaceutics, a Vision for the future biomedical and pharmaceutical community is buzzing with excitement about the potential novel therapies resulting from the genomic revolution, bioinformatics, stem cell research, cloning, chemical biology, molecular and cell biology, and the basic and clinical implications of pharmacogenomics and pharmacogenetics. If the promises and expectations hold, the researchers in the pharmaceutical field will have, in the foreseeable future, more therapeutic targets than we could have possibly imagined just 10 years ago,and have multiple redundant strategies for identifying and developing drug candidates. The nature of therapeutic agents and delivery strategies that will emerge from all these enterprises will probably keep changing and is likely to be different from what we have seen in the past. In many cases,we will undoubtedly have good ideas regarding their pharmacologic mechanisms upon inception as well as specific locations of action and their therapeutic concentrations. These changes, often viewed as “revolutionary” and labeled as such, certainly give us high hopes for the future. Would they,however, necessarily translate into more and better drug products and therapeutic modalities? There is one thing that is clearly changing: these developments pose a tremendous challenge to “pharmaceutics” or “drug delivery” and at the same time provide accompanying opportunities.A majority of researchers in modern biomedical research,and in cell and molecular biology in particular, often focus their thinking and efforts primarily on discoveries of so-called“basic” mechanisms, while their share of active contributions to drug development beyond that point tends to abate. To many, when certain therapeutic molecules exhibit goodspecific activities at relatively low concentrations in a testtube or a cell culture system, they magically become drugsthrough a long yet mysterious process until they materializein the clinical setting. It is not entirely clear where thisattitude originates, but we still have the inclination, especiallyin the academic and basic science community, not to soilour pure scientific hands with application-oriented pharmaceutical drug product development. This, I tend to believe,is primarily due to the misconception about the science of pharmaceutics. Perhaps the “black box” of the drug product development process, which certainly includes pharmaceutics, has been viewed until relatively recently as being too10.1021/mp0400041 CCC: $27.50 © 2004 American Chemical SocietyPublished on Web 03/26/2004much like engineering in nature and requiring little mechanism-based science.With the first two issues of Molecular Pharmaceutics, one can not help but appreciate the salient: pharmaceutics or pharmaceutical sciences, the discipline that focuses on transforming the “drug” to a clinically viable therapeutic“drug product”, is indeed multidisciplinary and will become increasingly so. Even after refinement by the addition of the descriptive term molecular to the name, the range of research articles already seen in this journal derive from a multitude of scientific disciplines. With the molecular and mechanistic emphasis, drug delivery and pharmaceutics have been changing conceptually from a rather descriptive science intoa logical and mechanism-based science that demands a molecular explanation of how the process works. The pressure is now on the pharmaceutical scientists, during the course of this evolution and revolution, to incorporate into pharmaceutical research the rapidly expanding body of knowledge in the molecular and cellular fields, rather than to focus exclusively in the traditional sense on formulating a delivery strategy for a given drug candidate even with the sacrifice of the molecular understanding of the design. This will undoubtedly force us into more intimate and successful collaboration with a wide range of scientific fields, which inevitably requires educating scientists from all relevant disciplines about the ever-evolving needs and concepts of molecular pharmaceutics. Like other fields in science, pharmaceutical sciences is truly multidisciplinary, and molecular pharmaceutics will be less apt to evolve and progress without collaborative efforts from a wide range of scientific disciplines. Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–68Available online at www.sciencedirect.comjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/AJPSOriginal Research PaperMulti-dimensional visualization for the morphologyof lubricant stearic acid particles and theirdistribution in tabletsLiu Zhang a,b, Shailendra Shakya b, Li Wu b, Jiangtao Wang c, Guanghui Jin c, Huimin Sun d,Xianzhen Yin b,*, Lixin Sun a,**, Jiwen Zhang a,b,*a Schoolof Pharmacy, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, Chinafor Drug Delivery Systems, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, Chinac Weihai Disu Pharmaceutical Manufacturer, Weihai 264200, Chinad National Institutes for Food and Drug Control, Beijing 100050, Chinab Centera r t i c l ei n f oa b s t r a c tArticle history:The shapes of particles and their distribution in tablets, controlled by pretreatment andReceived 29 July 2018tableting process, determine the pharmaceutical performance of excipient like lubricant.Revised 18 November 2018This study aims to provide deeper insights to the relationship of the morphology and spa-Accepted 10 January 2019tial distribution of stearic acid (SA) with the lubrication efficiency, as well as the resultingAvailable online 1 March 2019tablet property. Unmodified SA particles as flat sheet-like particles were firstly reprocessedby emulsification in hot water to obtain the reprocessed SA particles with spherical mor-Keywords:phology. The three-dimensional (3D) information of SA particles in tablets was detected byStearic acida quantitative and non-invasive 3D structure elucidation technique, namely, synchrotronMorphologyradiation X-ray micro-computed tomography (SR-µCT). SA particles in glipizide tablets pre-Spatial distributionpared by using unmodified SA (GUT), reprocessed SA (GRT), as well as reference listed drugSR-µCT(RLD) of glipizide tablets were analyzed by SR-µCT. The results showed that the reprocessedGlipizide tabletsSA with better flowability contributed to similarity of breaking forces between that of GRTand RLD. SA particles in GRT were very similar to those in RLD with uniform morphologyand particle size, while SA particles in GUT were not evenly distributed. These findings notonly demonstrated the feasibility of SR-µCT as a new method in revealing the morphologyand spatial distribution of excipient in drug delivery system, but also deepened insights ofsolid dosage form design into a new scale by powder engineering.© 2019 Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. Published by Elsevier B.V.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license.(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)*Corresponding authors. Center for Drug Delivery System, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 501of Haike Road, Shanghai 201203, China. Tel.: +86 20231980.**Corresponding author. Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, 103 Wenhua Road,Shenyang 110016, China. Tel.: +86 2423986365.E-mail addresses: yinxianzhen0001@163.com (X.Z. Yin), slx04@163.com (L.X. Sun), jwzhang@simm.ac.cn (J.W. Zhang).Peer review under responsibility of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajps.2019.01.0011818-0876/© 2019 Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-NDlicense. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–681.IntroductionExcipients play an important role in the properties and performance of the final formulation of solid dosage forms, suchas texture, stability, release, and bioavailability [1–3]. Amongall the excipients, lubricant can significantly change the dynamics of blending, compression and the mechanical properties of compacts. The physical properties of lubricant such asmagnesium stearate, stearic acid (SA) and talc can affect theirperformance in tablet and capsule formulations [4]. For pharmaceutical operations such as blending, roller compaction,tablet manufacturing and capsule filling, lubricants improvethe flowability of blends, facilitate unit operations and powder processing properties by reducing the inter-particle friction [5,6]. In terms of the effect of lubricant particle properties, SA can improve density, stickiness, and flowability ofpowdered excipient-drug mixtures. SA with a large surfacearea and small particle size has the best lubrication efficiency,since the increase of surface area can provide more surfacecoverage [4,7]. Ingredient spatial distribution is closely relatedto the quality attribute of tablet [8,9]. To study the influenceof SA on the physical properties of tablets, it should be verified that lubricant particles are homogeneously mixed withthe rest constituents of the formulation [10]. Systematic studies of three-dimensional (3D) material distribution in soliddosage forms are restricted with limited techniques. Most ofthe existing researches using near-infrared chemical imaging, Raman imaging or Terahertz time-domain reflection spectroscopy have been confined to research the material distribution on the surface of a sample or the cross-sectional specimen [11,12]. Recently, innovative research of synchrotron radiation X-ray micro-computed tomography (SR-µCT) in conjunction with liquid chromatography enables materials spatial distribution visualization in tablets [13].SR-µCT is an advanced tomographic imaging technologywhich employs synchrotron radiation, the most intense artificial source of X-ray, as an illuminating source to obtainthe internal and micro-structural details of a solid sample atmicrometer scale. Methods combining the obtained X-ray tomography, image processing, and 3D reconstruction have beendevised and evaluated to study systematically the researchedobjects. As SR-µCT can reveal the morphology and internal 3Dstructure, and give a better understanding of the properties ofdifferent materials, it has been used to extensively study geological specimens [14,15], bio-materials [16], tablets [17,18] andgranules [19]. In contrast to conventional techniques, SR-µCTprovides a non-invasive scan, quantitative visualization andevaluation of the 3D structures with high-speed imaging, intensive strength and high spatial resolution. Within pharmaceutical material science and drug delivery system research,SR-µCT has been applied to analyze the complex structuralsystems of HPMC-based extended release tablets and gain improved mechanistic knowledge on drug release [20]. For excipients in common use like microcrystalline cellulose, the highspatial resolution of SR-µCT makes it possible to evaluate individual structure of particles, processing behavior and to classify microcrystalline celluloses of the same grade from different manufacturers [21].61This study details multi-dimensional comparative research of SA particles in the reference listed drug (RLD) of glipizide tablets (Glucotrol® , 5 mg), glipizide tablets prepared using unmodified SA (GUT) and reprocessed SA (GRT). Considering the potential influence of morphology and size of SA particles on spatial distribution and tablet properties, efforts havebeen made to reprocess the common SA as flat sheet-like particles into SA particles with regular spherical morphology. SAparticles, before and after being compressed into tablets, havebeen visualized and quantified in multi-dimension to verifythe effect of SA morphology on tablet quality.2.Materials and methods2.1.MaterialsGlipizide tablet (Glucotrol® , 5 mg), manufactured by Pfizer U.S.Pharmaceuticals Group (New York, USA), was the referencelisted drug (RLD). Stearic acid (=99.5%, SA) and silicon dioxide(=99.0%) were purchased from Huzhou Prospect Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Zhejiang, China). Lactose (=99.5%), microcrystalline cellulose (=99.0%, MCC) and starch (=99.5%) were produced by Shanghai Yunhong Pharmaceutical Excipients Co.,Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Glipizide (=99.5%) and sodium laurylsulfate (=99.0%, SLS) were supplied by Sinopharm ChemicalReagent Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China.). Pure water was producedby water purification system (Academic, Millipore, USA).2.2.Reprocessing SA particlesAbout 300 mg SLS was weighed and dissolved under ultrasonic agitation for 10 min in 150 ml pure water to get a solution (0.2%, w/v). Then, 15 g SA was added into the SLS solution.The system was moved directly to a magnetic heated stirrer(ETS-D5, IKA, Germany) at a rotor speed of 1000 rpm and controlled at 80 °C for half an hour (The melting point of SA is68.8 °C). After that, the obtained emulsion of liquid SA and water was transferred to a vertical overhead stirrer (10 M/M-D15,IKA, Germany) to stir at 1000 rpm. At the same time, pure water (600 ml at 0 °C) was rapidly poured into the system whichresulted in a sudden fall in temperature below the meltingpoint of SA. The stir was prolonged further for 40 min. Thesolid particles were collected by filtration with 0.45 µm millipore filter and washed with 50 ml pure water. The obtained SAparticles were dried in a desiccator for 24 h and sieved through100 mesh size to obtain reprocessed SA particles.2.3.Flowability research of SA particlesUnmodified SA particles were firstly sieved through 100 meshsize and the obtained ones were used for the determinationof flowability and tableting. The angle of repose of unmodifiedSA particles and reprocessed SA particles were measured using a powder tester (PT-S, Hosokawa Micron, Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China). For each kind of SA particles, the measurement ofangle of repose was analyzed in triplicate.62Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–682.4.Preparation of glipizide tablets and determination ofmass and breaking forceFrom the label of Glucotrol® tablet published on the Food andDrug Administration, inert ingredients used were SA, silicondioxide, lactose, MCC and starch. Unmodified SA particles orreprocessed SA particles (1.5%, w/w) were well blended withglipizide and other excipients specified in the prescription by abench-top mixer (VH-2, Tianhe Machinery, Co., Ltd., Shanghai,China). Tablet compaction experiments were conducted on abench-scale rotary tablet presser (ZPS8, Tianjiu Machinery factory, Shanghai, China) equipped with 8.0 mm diameter andshallow concave punches, using compression force as 5 kN.Force-measuring equipment was connected to strain gauges(RFS150E, Huqin Equipement, Shanghai, China) which allowedthe pressure forces on the upper and under punches to be followed. The turret speed was set as 8 rpm. The filling depth ofmaterial was 5.60 mm. Mixed blend was directly compressedinto ~198 mg tablets with thickness of 3.80 ± 0.18 mm and diameter of 7.62 mm. GUT and GRT were produced, at the sametime, die wall force and ejecting force of each tablet were alsorecorded for further analysis.The determination of mass was performed by weighingeach kind of tablet with an analytical balance (CPA225D, Sartorius, Germany). According to the hardness test approvedby USP (1217), the breaking force of RLD, GUT and GRT weremeasured with a hardness tester (YPD-200C, Hengqin Instrument Equipment Co., Ltd. Shanghai, China) by compressingthe tablets between two slowly moving jaws until they werecrushed. The mass and breaking force of each kind of glizipidetablet were measured from 6-tablet samples.2.5.Isolation of SA particles in tabletsSA (specific gravity (s.g.): 0.86 at 20 °C) is practically insolublein water and less dense than water. Lactose and starch are water soluble, and glipizide (s.g.: 1.29), silicon dioxide (s.g.: 2.20)and MCC (s.g.: 1.27–1.60) used in tablet are denser than water (all the data come from PubChem). Hence, according to thedifference of solubility and density, SA particles can be separated from the tablet in water system, keeping their morphology and particle size unchanged.SA particles in RLD, GUT and GRT were isolated from active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) and other excipients byphysical method without changing their morphology. For eachkind of glipizide tablet, three tablets were dipped into 10 mlice cold water (0 °C). The tablets swelled slowly and disintegrated in 10 min. Meanwhile, ingredients were found floatingup in clusters. The suspension was allowed to set for another10 min at low temperature (0–10 °C) so that SA particles couldfloat in water completely. The buoyant layer, about one-thirdof the suspension, was collected into a beaker. Then cold water (0 °C) was added to the beaker up to 20 ml. After setting for10 min, some ingredients were found at the bottom and extremely fine particles of SA floated on the water surface. Thebuoyant layer was collected again and the same procedureswere repeated three times to isolate pure SA particles. The finally collected buoyant layer was transferred to an evaporating dish and placed in a desiccator at 20 °C till fully dried.2.6.Conventional morphological characterizationMorphological characterization of SA particles was carried outby scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S-4800, Hitachi). To obtain SEM photographs, specimens were evenly immobilizedon a metal stub with double-sided adhesive tape and coatedwith a thin layer of gold before being observed under magnification.2.7.Tablet structure measurement by SR-µCTSR-µCT tomographic images of three kinds of glipizide tabletswere acquired with the BL13W1 beam line at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF). Glipizide tablets were fixedon the sample stage with a double-sided adhesive tape to prevent any unexpected movements during scans. Axis adjustment of the sample stage was also taken to make sure thatthere was no deviation in the horizontal direction during sample rotation. RLD, GUT and GRT were measured in different SRµCT scans. According to the preliminary experiments and references, the imaging parameters have been optimized [22,23].The tablets were scanned with a photon energy of 18.0 keV. After penetration through the sample, the X-rays were convertedinto visible light by a YAG: Ce scintillator (200 µm thickness).Projections were magnified by diffraction-limited microscopeoptics (1.25 × magnification) and digitized in high-resolutionwith an effective pixel size of 5.2 µm (ORCA Flash 4.0 Scientific CMOS, Hamamatsu K.K., Shizuoka Pref., Japan, physicalpixel size: 6.5 µm). The exposure time affects the X-ray photon number reaching the detector. When the exposure timeincreases, the flux used to capture a projection will be raised,as well as the analyzing time. In our study, the exposure timewas 1 s. The distance between sample to detector (DSD) is alsoa key factor in-line phase contrast SR-µCT, and especially useful for the imaging of materials with low-Z elements and lowdensity. In order to enhance the contrast to show a small difference in density, the DSD was also adjusted appropriatelyand was set at 12 cm. For each acquisition, 900 projection images were captured with an angular step size of 0.2° for 180°.Flat-field images (i.e., X-ray illumination on the beam pathwithout the sample) and dark-field images (i.e., X-ray illumination off) were also collected during each acquisition procedure, so as to correct the electronic noise and variations in theX-ray source brightness. Imaging acquisition time for each CTscan was 30 min.2.8.3D structure reconstructionIn order to enhance the quality of reconstructed slices,propagation-based phase-contrast extraction was successfully conducted as described previously in our report [24].Software PITRE (Phase-sensitive X-ray Image processing andTomography REconstruction), which extracts information ofdiffraction enhanced imaging, and PITRE BM (PITRE BatchManager), which executes a series of tasks that created viaPITRE [25], were applied to allow parallel-beam tomographyreconstruction for conventional absorption CT information.Depending on the magnitude of X-ray absorption for different materials of the glipizide tablet, gray level images wereAsian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–6863Fig. 1 – SEM micrographs of unmodified SA (A)–(C) and reprocessed SA (D)–(F) under different magnifications reveal that themorphology and size of reprocessed SA are more regular than those of unmodified SA. SEM images of SA particles isolatedfrom RLD (G), GUT (H) and GRT (I) show that the morphologies of these three kinds of SA particles are similar.formed and the gray levels of various materials were determined, such that the SA particles of interest could be extractedfrom the 3D models by segmentation in imaging processing.Threshold was defined and certain gray value correspondingto the SA particles was determined (Fig. 3), so that SA particlescan be separated from the solid matrix. The 3D rendered datawere analyzed by using the commercially available softwareAmira (version 6.01, FEI, USA) and Image Pro Analyzer 3D (version 7.0, Media Cybernetics, Inc., Bethesda, MD, USA), to obtain structural and morphological information of SA particlesin tablets. In line with the differences of materials in densitiesand molecular properties (Table S1), the precise profile parameters were calculated.3.Results and discussion3.1.Two dimensional morphology analysis of SA particlesThe morphology and surface characteristics of unmodifiedSA particles and reprocessed SA particles analyzed by SEMare presented in Fig. 1. Notably, unmodified SA particles(Fig. 1A–C) with flat sheet-like morphology are conspicuouslyvaried in size, while reprocessed SA particles (Fig. 1D–F) aretopographically more spherical and relatively more uniformin size. At individual particle level, some particles of unmodified SA are larger in size with a smooth surface, while someof reprocessed SA particles possess obscure invagination. Inshort, the morphology and size of reprocessed SA particlesare more regular than those of unmodified SA particles. Thecomparatively big differences existing in unmodified and reprocessed SA particles make them distinguishable from eachother.SEM images of SA particles isolated from RLD (Fig. 1G), GUT(Fig. 1H) and GRT (Fig. 1I) display similar appearance. Dramaticchanges can be seen in the morphology of unmodified SA inGUT from an irregular flat shape to much rounder morphology, while no evident morphology changes are observed fromreprocessed SA. Due to the low melting point of SA (68.8 °C),morphological changes of SA particles could be due to the heatproduction process of material mixing or tableting. The moreuniform of the SA particles morphology, the more uniformforce applied to SA, and the smaller frictional force among materials.64Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–68Fig. 2 – Reconstruction and phase contrast extraction process include shadow projection after flat-field and dark-fieldcorrections (A), projection after phase retrieval (B), reconstructed slice (C), truncated slice (D), 3D image of a tablet (E) and SAparticles in the tablet (F).SA particles were isolated according to the density and water solubility of each substance that formed the tablet, whichwere further confirmed by thermal platform microscope inour work and more relevant researches will be carried out inlater studies.3.2.Glipizide tablets measured by SR-µCTBy SR-µCT scan, original data of hundreds of shadow projections were firstly gotten (Fig. 2A) but revealed no useful information. Phase retrieval was performed with projection images using the software PITRE for propagation-based phasecontrast extraction (Fig. 2B). Then, reconstructed 2D slices ofthe specimen were obtained and the value of a was calibratedfrom 32 bit to 8 bit (gray value 0–255) (Fig. 2C and 2D). The CTimage values (gray-levels) provide information on the materialX-ray attenuation coefficient at each point in the image. As thereconstructed 2D slice (Fig. 3A) of the RLD radial middle layershow, the lighter areas of the slice have a relatively high grayvalue and the darker areas with a low gray value. SA particleshave the lowest density among all the ingredients in glipizidetablet, which reflects weaker X-ray absorption and the lowestgray value. Thus, it is certained that the small dark spots in theslice are the SA particles. Fig. 3B is the partial magnificationof the slice, which shows how the threshold of SA particlesdefined. As shown in the line profile (Fig. 3C) of the selectedSA particle, the steepest part of the line was chosen and themiddle value of its vertical coordinate was determined as thethreshold. In order to obtain as exact gray value of SA particles as possible, the dark spots in different slices of differentglipizide tablets were calculated. As the threshold was definedand certain gray value corresponds to the SA particles was determined, SA particles can be separated from the solid matrix(Fig. 2F), which realistically reconstructs the morphology andposition of SA particles in tablets.Then, all the 2D slices were processed by Amira to get thefull reconstructed 3D images of tablets (Fig. 2E). The 3D morphological information of hundreds even thousands of SA particles can be obtained and 3D quantitative parameters are calculated. Besides, the uniformity of SA particles spatial distribution in tablets is monitored via high-resolution imaging using SR-µCT.The use of non-destructive X-ray micro-tomography allowsone to characterize the density distribution of an individualtablet and then further characterize the particles within thetablet. The optimized 3D models provide full details of surfacemorphology and distribution of SA particles in the tablet. 3Dimages of SA particles existed in tablets are presented fromtwo different perspectives (Fig. 4A, C and E). Partial magnifications of SA particles are also displayed (Fig. 4B, D and F)and each particle is colored randomly by Image Pro Analyzer3D. The mapping spatial distribution of SA particles from 3Doverall view shows that SA particles in RLD (Fig. 4(A) and (B))and in GRT (Fig. 4E and F) are uniformly distributed. In someparts of GUT (Fig. 4C and D), there are SA clusters and somezones are without SA particles, reflecting that spatial distribution of SA particles is relatively heterogeneous in GUT. Thisphenomenon suggests that the inter-particle friction variedgreater among different parts in GUT when compared withRLD and GRT. The size of SA particles in RLD and GRT is moreregular than in GUT. Moreover, SA particles exhibit most standard morphology in GRT, followed by in RLD and then in GUT,65Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–68Fig. 3 – 2D original slice of the radial middle layer of the glipizide tablet (A), partial magnification of the slice containing theselected SA particle (B) and the line profile of the selected SA particle (C).Table 1 – Comparison and analysis of 3D morphological parameters like sphericity, equivalent diameter, area of surface, volume, total area of surface of individual SA particles, as well as the number of SA particles in RLD, GUT and GRT(mean ± SD).Morphology parameterSphericityEquivalent diameter (µm)Area of surface (µm2 )Volume (µm3 )Total area of surface (µm2 )Number of particlesIndividual SA particles in tabletsRLDGUTGRT0.86 ± 0.0936.28 ± 17.845 786 ± 6 15645 872 ± 73 0254.88 × 10784320.83 ± 0.0934.60 ± 22.906 659 ± 12 64463 381 ± 222 4772.98 × 10744790.86 ± 0.0626.45 ± 11.793 086 ± 2 75215 923 ± 20 3898.60 × 10727 875which can be seen from partial magnifications (Fig. 4B, 4D and4F). Apparently, the size of SA particles in GUT are less regular,and the difference of morphological characteristics betweendifferent particle size ranges is also large. Bigger SA particlesmay also result from the agglomeration of the particles in GUT,which most likely due to the different SA particles used. Withthe powerful SR-µCT technology, physical state of SA particleslocated in solid dosage form is visualized from multiple visionperspectives with a high spatial resolution.3D morphological parameters like sphericity, equivalentdiameter, area of surface, volume, total area of surface of SAparticles, as well as number of SA particles in the three kindsof tablets were calculated and tabulated in Table 1. The frequency distributing graphs of sphericity and surface area ofSA particles in each kind of tablet are also shown in Fig. 5 tovisually compare the differences by mathematical statistics.Sphericity is usually defined as a ratio of the surface area of asphere having the same volume with the particle to the actualsurface area of the particle [26]. The sphericity of a sphere is“1” and any particle which is not a sphere will have sphericity less than “1” [27]. Average value of sphericity for SA particles in GRT is similar to that in RLD, while it is smaller inGUT. Both the standard deviation of sphericity and the frequency distributing graph of the sphericity (Fig. 5A) indicatethe sphericity fluctuation of SA particles in GRT is the smallest. What’s more, the morphology of SA particles in GUT isthe most non-uniform, which is clearly presented in the frequency distributing graph of sphericity. As sphericity of parti-cles is thought to be related to the flowability [4], SA particlesused in GRT and RLD have better lubrication efficiency thanthose in GUT. In addition, the improved sphericity of SA particles in GRT is undoubtedly owing to the reprocessing.Equivalent diameter here is the diameter of a sphere withthe same volume as the target object. The average value ofequivalent diameter for SA particles in GRT is the smallest,while the standard deviation of equivalent diameter for SAparticles in GUT is the biggest. Meanwhile, for average valueof surface area and volume, SA particles in GRT, RLD and GUTarise by their turns. Therefore, it is easy to conclude thatSA particles in GRT are relatively small. Because the usageamount of SA in GUT and GRT is the same, the smaller particlesize contributes to larger number of particles. And the number of SA particles in GRT is the biggest, then in RLD, and followed by SA particles in GUT. Since the standard deviations ofsize parameters especially those of SA particles in GUT are sohigh, considering the average value of size parameters aloneis not enough to get accurate information. As mentioned earlier, larger surface area contributes to improved lubrication efficiency. The total surface area of SA particles in GUT is thesmallest, reflecting that SA particles with the biggest particlesize in GUT have no better lubrication efficiency than thosein the other two kinds of tablets. The frequency profiles (Fig.5B) of surface area indicate that rather than in GUT, the frequency distribution tendency of SA particles in GRT are moresimilar with in RLD. In short, from the 3D measurement using SR-µCT technology, uniformly spherical SA particles with66Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–68Fig. 4 – The 3D images of SA particles in different kinds of glipizide tablets. The left column shows location of the total SAparticles in tablets and the right column shows a partial enlarged view of SA particles. (A, B), (C, D), (E, F) represent SA inRLD, GUT and GRT, respectively. Each particle is colored randomly by the software.Fig. 5 – Frequency distributing graphs of 3D morphological parameters of SA particles in RLD (blue), GUT (red) and GRT(green).a narrow size distribution can be observed in GRT, which iscloser to the results in RLD. The elaborate quantitative resultsof SA particles in tablet, which cannot be obtained without thepowerful 3D visualization tool, clearly have a profound significance for pharmaceutical design.Rather than the conventional microscopic evaluations onlyrevealing incomplete morphology, the 3D structural and morphological elucidation technique of SR-µCT can satisfy the research requirements with reliable and comprehensive information in drug delivery system. Furthermore, the degree ofAsian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–68fluctuation shown in standard deviations of 3D parameters isa reflection of the regularity in morphology. It is found thatSA particles in GRT feature the best regular morphology thatshow superior flowability. SA particles in GUT have the highest fluctuation range in morphology. Particularly, for surfacearea and volume, standard deviations of SA particles in GUTare much higher than those in the other two kinds of tablets.The dramatic visualization of SR-µCT images offered a reliablesemi-quantitative overview of the SA particles distribution intablets. Overall, compared with SA particles in GUT, those inGRT are more consistent with those in RLD.As demonstrated by the excipient example presented inthis report, accurate quantitative characterizations of component in tablet are possible when appropriate techniques areused. For SR-µCT, high spatial resolution and contrast imaging form the basis of reliable quantitative analysis. The spatial resolution in our study is 5.2 µm and SA particles below5.23 µm3 cannot be determined. The accuracy of the quantified SR-µCT experiments also depends on the stability of X-raybeam physical dimensions and intensity profile, the detectionresponse characteristics and count rate ranges.3.3.Flowability, compression property and breaking forceanalysisThe angles of repose for unmodified SA particles and reprocessed SA particles are 52.61 ± 0.90° and 49.08 ± 1.23°, respectively. For optimized SA particles, the average value of angleof repose is smaller, reflecting its better flowability than unmodified SA particles. What is more, the existence of the traceamount of SLS brings no improvement in the flowability of SAparticles (data are not be provided). Average values of die wallforce of GUT and GRT are 0.41 kN and 0.47 kN, and ejectingforce are 0.23 kN and 0.17 kN, respectively. The die wall forceindicates favorable compaction properties that prevent problems such as capping during mass manufacturing of tablets[28], the higher die wall force for GRT indicates that reprocessed SA particles are more suitable for tableting. For ejecting force, contrasted to unmodified SA particles, reprocessedSA particles make the tablet formulation possess lower adhesive force and frictional force during ejection of GRT fromthe die cavity. Tablet breaking force is a critical parameter inpharmaceutical process quality control, and depends on factors such as compression force, particle size and inter-particleforce [29]. In our research, breaking force evolution for RLD(70.59 ± 6.82 N), GUT (86.58 ± 7.91 N) and GRT (68.09 ± 4.24 N)indicates that the effect of SA particles on the breaking force oftablet is obvious. The breaking force increased with the degreeof irregularity of SA particles and GRT is much closer to RLD.Combined with the SR-µCT analysis, it seems that more regular morphology with higher sphericity of SA particles resultedin a less inter-particle force and decreased breaking force. Itshould be noted that the gap of morphological parameters likeparticle volume, surface area and total surface area betweenGRT and RLD are large, but the breaking force of RLD and GRTare overlapping. While more importantly, the order of thesemorphological parameters of RLD, GRT and GUT has the sametrend as that of the breaking forces of the three kinds of tabletsconsidering the mean ± SD values. Some complicated mathe-67matical or logical relationship may exist between these morphological parameters and breaking force. After all, it has beenconfirmed that the breaking force of tablets is affected by multiple factors, and the specific mathematical relationship hasnot been reported so far. It is thought that the usage of different kinds of SA particles chiefly contributed to the morphological differences among SA particles in RLD, GUT and GRTand resulted in difference in tablet breaking force, whereasthe compaction conditions may also have impact on the results that cannot be underestimated. More detailed analysesof these impacts are beyond the scope of the present reportbut deserve further investigation.4.ConclusionsIn this study, a powerful structural method has been established for the characterization of morphology and spatial distribution of SA particles in tablet prepared with different morphologies of SA as a new way to research the material insolid dosage forms. The improved structural consistency between reprocessed SA particles in GRT and SA particles inRLD ensures high quality of glipizide tablets. For excipientslike SA to function according to its particle structure and spatial distributions in tablets, 3D reconstruction and quantitative structure analysis by SR-µCT significantly deepen insightsof solid dosage form design and evaluation as well as rational optimization of production process. More specifically,the novel methodology of excipient structure consistency research opens a new way to secure high quality for both genericand brand products of drugs in solid dosage forms.Conflicts of interestThe authors declare that there is no conflicts of interest.AcknowledgmentsThe authors are grateful for the financial support fromthe National Science and Technology Major Project(2017ZX09101001-006). Thanks to the BL13W1 beamlineof the SSRF for the precious beam time and help from theteam.Supplementary materialsSupplementary material associated with this article can befound, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ajps.2019.01.001.