Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 356–364
Assembling structurally customizable synthetic
carriers of siRNA through thermodynamically
self-regulated process
Guang Bai, Tong Xue, Xiaotao Dong, Uday Kumar Chinta, Jia Feng, Tuo Jin∗, Fei Wu∗
School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China

Abstract

This study demonstrates that our previously reported polywraplex, a synthetic siRNA carrier consisting of a uni-molecular polyplex core of customizable size and a self-assembled tri-block copolymer envelop, may be constructed using dendrimers as the crosslinking junctions. Replacing the branched low molecular weight PEI with polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer in the zeta potential regulated polymerization resulted in the similar network structured cationic polymer with electron microscopically visible crosslinking

Keywords
Networked cationic polymer Thermodynamically self-regulated processes siRNA delivery Unimolecular polyplex Zeta potential regulated polymerization

Introduction
While the ability of nucleic acids to express, silence, edit and
regulate genes enable them to be powerful therapeutic agents
in potential, the lack of safe and efficient carrier systems to
deliver them to sites of action retarded practical applications
[1–2]. Synthetic carriers of nucleic acids are regarded to be
∗

safe biologically and have attracted extensive research efforts,
however, the advances are still far from satisfactory [3–5].
The synthetic carriers most reported to date, polyplexes,
lipoplexes, micelplexes, synthetic lipidoids, and hydrophobic
polymer particles, were assembled rather randomly with
arbitrary amounts of functional components immobilized
[6–10]. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles with a variety of
modified inner surface and dendritic cationic polymer

represent alternative synthetic carrier systems of semidefined structure [11–12]. Although the nano-architectures
of DNA or RNA may be constructed precisely through the
preprogrammed assembly, they are less functioning because
the building blocks are chemically homogenous to what they
deliver [13–14]. There has yet to be a synthetic carrier of
nucleic acids assembled as precise in structure and function
in cell targeting as viral vectors, the nature-existing nanomachinery capable to deliver genetic materials to host cells.
Despite the still-standing unmet need, reports in this field
seem to have decreased dramatically in the literature in recent
years [15]. Even though some newly emerged topic may have
attracted public attention, lack of new strategies to overcome
the encountered difficulties may have compromised people’s
enthusiasm.
To address the situation, we reported a precisely
customizable and broadly applicable nano-vehicle for
researchers to easily functionalize according to their specific
needs recently [16]. This system, known as polywraplex,
consists of a pH-responsive polyplex core of customizable
size and a self-assembled monolayer membrane of rationally
designed triblock copolymer membrane to immobilize
functional components. The polyplex-forming cationic
polymer possesses a uni-sized networked structure and
imidazole-4,5-diimine involved backbone which was formed
by zeta potential regulated polymerization of spermine and
branched low molecular weight PEI through imidazole-4,5dicarbaldehyde. Since the increased zeta potential of the
growing polymer inhibited more of the cationic reactants
to approach, the polymerization was self-terminated at
a size. The beauty of the art is that this size customized
cationic polymer packed siRNA intramolecularly to form a
uni-molecular polyplex when siRNA was gradually added into
its solution [16]. The imidazole ring involved in the polymer
backbone possesses a pKa of 5.9 for which endosomal pH
may induce protonation of the ring and disruption of the
fairly stable conjugated π bond of the imine linkages [17]. The
self-assembled monolayer membrane was formed by triblock
copolymer which was consisted of: a negative multicarboxyl
saccharide head that lead the whole triblock copolymer to
the polyplex core; a polycaprolactone (PCL) middle block that
formed hydrophobic layer to isolate the internal and external
water environment and to prevent siRNA from degrading by
RNase in vivo; and a poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) block which
made the whole nanoparticle keep a neutralized condition
and prohibit siRNA non-specific absorption in vivo. This triblock copolymer membrane self-assembled around the pHresponsive polyplex core may not only prevent pre-phagocytic
siRNA leaking and charge induced non-specific binding
but also offer a convenient way to immobilize functional
components in the optimized surface population [18].
To further clarify the network structure of the
polymer, we replaced the branched low molecular PEI
with polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer in the zeta
potential regulated polymerization in the present study
in order to observe the crosslinking junctions electron
microscopically. The obtained electron microscopic images
further indicated the expected networked structure,
and a series of physical chemical characterizations
(including the surface assembly) and biological assays

357

confirmed the same nature and functions of polyplex and
polywraplex.

2.

Materials and methods

2.1.

Materials

Imidazole-4,5-dicarbaldehyde and PEG45-PCL20-maltotrioseCOO− was synthesized as our previous study [17–
18]. Polyamidoamine (PAMAM) G6 was purchased
from CYD Company (Weihai, China). Spermine, PEI
25k and dimethylformamide (DMF) were obtained
from Sigma-Aldrich (MA, USA). Anti-VEGFA sense
strand (5 -GGAGUACCCUGAUGAGAUCdTdT-3 ), antisense
strand
(5 -GAUCUCAUCAGGGUACUCCdTdT-3 ),
Cy3
and Cy5-labeled siRNA were all purchased from
GenePharma (Shanghai, China). The VEGFA primer
(forward 5 -AGGAGGGCAGAATCATCACG-3 and reverse
5 -GATCCGCATAATCTGCATGGT-3 ) and the GAPDH primer
(forward 5 -CCAAGGTCATCCATGACAAC-3 and reverse 5 TCCACAGTCTTCTGAGTGGC-3 ) were synthesized by and
obtained from Sangon Biotech (Shanghai, China). U87MG
cell line was acquired from Guo Shengrong laboratory at
Shanghai Jiao Tong University (Shanghai, China). 5-week-old
male Bab/c nude mice were acquired from Experimental
animal center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (Shanghai,
China). The usage of animal was performed according to the
guideline of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC) of Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

2.2.
Synthesis and characterization of the networked
cationic polymer
Spermine (40 mg, 0.197 mmol) in water (2 ml), Imidazole-4,5dicarbaldehyde (30 mg, 0.247 mmol) in DMF/water (1 ml/1 ml)
were mixed and stirred at room temperature for 12 h, the
color of the solution changed from colorless to dark red,
following which, PAMAM (143 mg, 2.47 μmol) in water (2 ml)
was added to the mixture dropwise for 2 h with continuous
stirring at room temperature. The endpoint of the reaction
was measured using dynamic laser scattering (DLS) to detect
the size of the networked cationic polymer. At last, the
solution was subjected to dialysis by a cutoff size 10 KDa
cellulose membrane to remove the organic solution DMF and
finally lyophilized to get the final polymer [16].

2.3.
Formation and characterization of polyplex and
polywraplex
Polyplex was formulated by dropping siRNA solution into
networked cationic polymer in a series mass ratio of
siRNA/cationic polymer (1/1, 1/2, 1/3, 1/5, 1/7, 1/10, 1/15
and 1/20), incubated for 30 min at room temperature. The
Polyetherimide 25 K (PEI 25 K) polyplex as the positive control
group was processed through mixing siRNA solution and
PEI 25 K solution in mass ratio (wsiRNA /wPEI25K = 1/2) in equal
volume. The condensing ability of polyplex was confirmed
by agarose gel electrophoresis. Polywraplex was prepared
by dropping triblock surface copolymer into the selected

358

Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 356–364

polyplex (wsiRNA /wcationic polymer = 1/7) solution, incubated
for 30 min at room temperature. Both particle size and Zeta
potential of the polyplexes and polywraplexes were measured
using DLS (Zetasizer Nano, Malvern). Microscopic morphology
of polyplexes and polywraplexes were determined using
transmission electron microscope (TEM, FEI).

2.4.

Serum stability of polyplex and polywraplex

The polyplex was formulated as presented in
Section 2.3 (wcationic polymer /wsiRNA = 7/1), and the polywraplex
(wtriblock copolymer /wcationic polymer = 12/1),
followed
by
incubated with 50% fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 37 °C for
48 h. Samples were taken at each time and detected using
electrophoresis.

2.5.

Cell culture

Human primary glioblastoma cell line U87MG was cultured in
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Gibco) containing
10% FBS, penicillin (100 units/ml), and streptomycin
(100 μg/ml) in a cell incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2 .

2.6.
Intracellular uptake of polyplex and polywraplex
using flow cytometry
U87MG cells were seeded onto 48-well microplates (10 × 104
cells/well) and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. Subsequently, Cy3labeled siRNA polyplex and polywraplex (contained siRNA
was 500 ng/well) were added, respectively. After incubating
for 4 h, the cells were harvested and detected using flow
cytometry (BD). The data was assessed using FlowJo software.

2.7.
Intracellular distribution of the polyplex and
polywraplex using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM)
U87MG cells were seeded in 12-well plate with 14 mm cover
glass and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h (1 × 104 cells/well). The
medium was replaced, then the Cy3-labeled siRNA (contained
siRNA was 2000 ng) polyplex and polywraplex solution were
added to the wells, respectively. After incubation for 4 h,
the cells were washed three times with PBS, stained with
LysoTracker Green (75 nM) and DAPI (2 μg/ml), and imaged
using CLSM.

2.8.

Cytotoxicity of the network cationic polymer

U87MG cells were seeded onto 96-well microplates and
incubated for 24 h at 37 °C. The cytotoxicity of the network
cationic polymer against U87MG cells was evaluated using
Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK8 kit, Dojindo). Following the CCK8 kit
protocol, the cells were incubated with the network cationic
polymer in PBS solution of concentration from 20 to 300 μg/ml
for 4 h in which the same concentrations of PEI 25k PBS
solution were as positive control, then the CCK-8 agent was
added into the 96-well microplates. After 2 h, the absorbance
at 450 nm was measured using microplate reader (Molecular
Devices). The result was normalized to untreated cells.

2.9.
Determination of VEGFA gene silence of polyplex and
polywraplex in U87MG cells using qPCR
U87 MG cells were seeded onto 24 well microplates (10 × 105
cells /well) and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h, polyplex (contained
siRNA was 1 μg /well) were added onto the wells and
incubated in FBS free DMEM culture for 4 h, subsequently,
the culture was substituted with 10% FBS. After 24 h, cells
were harvested, total mRNA was extracted using TRIzol
(Thermofisher) and reverse transcribed into cDNA using
PrimeScript RT reagent Kit (Takara). The real-time qPCR was
operated using Eppendorf Mastercycler. To assess the gene
silencing ability of polywraplex against the interference of
FBS, polywraplex (contained siRNA was 1 μg/well) were added
onto the wells and incubated in 10% FBS DMEM culture for
4 h, and exchanged with fresh DMEM medium containing 10%
FBS. After 24 h, cells were harvested and PCR reaction was
processed as previously described.

2.10.

In vivo distribution of polywraplex

To assess the distribution of systemic delivery of Cy5-siRNA
polypwraplex required utilization of tumor models performed
by inoculating U87MG cells to male BALB/c nude mice under
the right armpits skin (2 × 106 cells). When the tumor was
allowed to mature (volume 150–200 mm3 ), mice were divided
into naked Cy5-labeled siRNA, Cy5-labeled siRNA polyplex,
and Cy5-labeled siRNA polywraplex groups randomly. Each
of the groups was intravenously injected with dosage form
at the dose of 0.5 mg/Kg, respectively. After 24 h, the tissues
of mice were harvested and fluorescence image using IVIS
instrument (PerkinElmer) was performed.

2.11.

Tumor suppression test in vivo

To evaluate the ability of tumor suppression in vivo, inoculated
U87MG cells were injected into the mice as previously
described. When the tumor volume reached 150–200 mm3 ,
mice were randomly divided into four groups (6 mice each
group): saline, naked anti-VEGFA siRNA, anti-VEGFA siRNA
polyplex and anti-VEGFA siRNA polywraplex. The mice
of each group were injected the dosage form at the dose
of 0.5 mg/Kg, through the tail vein every 7 d The length
(L) and the width (W) of the tumor were recorded during
the period of experiment and the volume of tumor was
calculated (V = LW2 /2). At last, the tumors were harvested,
weighed and photographed. Body weight of mice was
also detected every 3 d, and survival curve was drawn
correspondingly.

2.12.

Evaluation of anti-angiogenetic efficacy

The anti-angiogenetic therapy efficacy of the polywraplex (the
four groups: saline, naked siRNA, polyplex and polywraplex)
was measured by calculating the density of blood capillaries.
The capillaries of tumor slides of each group were stained
with rabbit anti-CD 31 antibodies.

Fig. 1 – Schematic diagram of the process of uni-molecular polyplex formulation, and the subsequent utilization as a core to
obtain assembled polywraplex encapsulated by triblock copolymers.

2.13.

Statistical analysis

The data of each group collected were analyzed by two-way
t-test, using OriginPro 2017 software. The value of ∗∗ P < 0.01,
∗∗∗ P < 0.001 was considered as statistically significance (Fig. 1).

Results

3.1.
Synthesis of network cationic polymer through
thermodynamically interlocked method

A thermodynamically interlocked method was utilized
to construct a network cationic polymer, which was
polymerized by condensing PAMAM and oligo-spermineimidazole-diimine through imine which was pH-responsible

in biological condition according to previously study [17]. The
oligo-spermine-imidazole-diimine was condensed by mixing
imidazole-4,5- dicarbaldehyde and spermine in a mole ratio
5/4 for 12 h. At the end of the reaction, the generation of Zeta
potential around the network cationic polymer would prohibit
additional cationic materials from further polymerizing,
giving rise to a thermodynamic interlocked method, following
which a network cationic polymer of the mean particle
diameter of 408 nm was thermodynamically synthesized.
Similarity of the structure to dendrimers, with increasing in
diameter, the molecular weight (MW) doubles, the MW
of PAMAM dendrimer 6 generation was 58048 Dalton and
diameter was 6.7 nm, the MW of network cationic polymer
was high, approximately tens of millions Dalton and couldn’t
be detected accurately using the molecular weight analysis
method, size-exclusion chromatography. The H-NMR of the
network cationic polymer (DMSO-d6, ppm): 8.45-8.38 (m,


Fig. 2 – The structure characterization of the networked cationic polymer, polyplex and polywraplex. (A) 1H-NMR of
networked cationic polymer; (B) Image of agarose electrophoresis of polyplex in a series of the mass ratio of
siRNA/networked cationic polymer; (C) Particle size and zeta potential of polyplex upon addition of siRNA into the
networked cationic polymer; (D) Change of particle size and zeta potential during formulating polywraplex.

=NH-), 8.06-7.73 (m, Ar-H), 3.56-2.16 (m, -CH2-CH2-), is as
shown in Fig. 2A.

3.2.
Formation and characterization of polyplex and
polywraplex
As shown in Fig. 2B, the image of the electrophoresis indicated
that cationic polymer could condense the siRNA completely,
when mass ratios of network cationic polymer/siRNA were
more than 1:1. As shown in Fig. 2C, the particle shrank from
its maximum size at 408 to 81 nm as siRNA was gradually
dropping to the polymer solution in the mass ratio from
1/20 to 1/5. Then the diameter regained to near 200 nm
after continuously adding siRNA. The shrinkage of particles
was attributed to the siRNA encapsulated into the cationic
polymer by the electrostatic forces. When a charged particle
collapsed to a smaller size due to neutralization or partial
neutralization, the oppositely charged species must be located
inside the particle. After that, upon further addition of siRNA,
the particle gradually rebounded to near 200 nm, which was
initiated by the condensation ability of the cationic polymer
being saturated, no further the siRNA could enter into them.
Meanwhile, the decrease of zeta potential gradually deprived
stability of the individual particles in solution, inducing the
inter-particulate condensation.
The core of polywraplex was constructed using polyplex
(wcationic polymer /wsiRNA = 7/1), since the mRNA expression
suppression of polyplex was optimum in the mass ratio at
7/1 shown in Fig. 5B and the diameter was about 100 nm
shown in Fig. 2C which was prone to enhanced permeability
and retention (EPR) effect [19]. The mass ratio of triblock
copolymer/cationic polymer (w/w = 12/1) was used to surface
layer of formulated polywraplex because that the surface
of particle presented neutralization shown zeta potential
decreased to 0 mV in Fig. 2D. The decreased reason of zeta
potential was due to the surface positive charge of polyplex
neutralized by excessive negative charged triblock copolymer,
according to previous studies in this project [18].

As the image of TEM shown in Fig. 3A, the networked
cationic polymer was connected with the black crosslinking
junction on the TEM photograph, indicating that the
whole polymers were consisted of branched PAMAM G6
and the linear oligo-spermine-imidazole-4,5-diimine to
form networked structure. As shown in Fig. 3B, the image
demonstrated that the polyplexes in the mass ratio of 7/1
could condense the siRNA effectively. Under the 0.5 μm scale,
polyplexes were well-formed, spherical with a particle size
of about 100 nm. The TEM image of polywraplexes showed
that morphology of the particle was near sphere and the size
at about 200 nm larger than polyplexes, as shown in Fig. 3C.
both of the particles sizes were less smaller than DLS data
shown in Fig. 2C and 2D since DLS detects the hydrodynamic
size of particle which is swollen in water condition compared
to the dried state of TEM sample, meanwhile, the asymmetric
surface monolayer of polywraplex with low electronic density
was not clearly visible by TEM.

3.3.

Serum stability of polyplex and polywraplex

As shown in Fig. 4A. the image of the electrophoresis agarose
gel demonstrated that the degradation time of the siRNA
in polyplex is consistency with Naked siRNA was about
6 h, for positive polyplexes are believed to induce strong
interaction with the compositions in the FBS for which may
lose the ability to protect the siRNA [18]. When siRNA amid
polywraplex, it could be detected until 48 h since the surface
tri-block copolymer membrane could play the role of guardian
to avoid degrading in serum.

3.4.
Determination of intracellular uptake efficiency of
polyplex and polywraplex in U87MG cells using flow
cytometry
The intracellular uptake efficiency of the polyplexes and
polywraplexes in U87MG cells was measured using flow
cytometry. As shown in Fig. 4B, the uptake efficiency of

polyplexes in different mass ratios from 7/1 to 15/1 was
almost the same with PEI 25 K group, which was the gold
standard of gene non-viral vector but owned high cytotoxicity.
When FBS excised in the medium shown in Fig. 4C, the uptake
efficiency of polyplex was lower than polywraplex. The nearly
30 eV cationic charges of the naked polyplexes were believed
to induce strong interaction with the proteins in the FBS for
which may compromise the polyplexes to interact with the
target cells. In the case of polywraplexes, since the surface
charges were neutralized/covered by the tri-block copolymer
membrane, the particles had better accessibility with the
target cells.

3.5.
Intracellular distribution of the polyplex and
polywraplex using CLSM
The intracellular distribution of the polyplex and the
polywraplex was measured using CLSM. As shown in Fig. 4D,
the red dots (Cy3-labeled siRNA polyplex) can overlap with the
green dots (LysoTrack Green- labeled lysosomes) indicating

that polyplexes were successfully uptaken by the U87MG
cells in the FBS free medium. At the same time, polywraplex
could transfect siRNA more effectively than polyplex in the
FBS 10% medium. The Cy3-labeled siRNAs were presented in
the cytoplasm, which was the destination for them to play
the role of silence instead of cell nucleus. The results indicate
that the polywraplex can protect siRNA from degrading and
can effectively take siRNA into the cytoplasm. These results
were consistent with the data of cellular uptake experiment.

3.6.

Cytotoxicity of the network cationic polymer

As shown in Fig. 5A, cytotoxicity of the network cationic
polymer was tested through the viability of U87MG cells
treated with a serious concentration of the polymers. While
PEI 25 K was as positive control, the viability of the networked
cationic polymer was higher than PEI 25 K in U87MG cells
in concentration from 20 to 300 μg/ml. The differentiation of
cytotoxicity of two polymers may be due to the components
of the cationic polymer which was linked with pH-sensitive

Fig. 5 – (A) viability of U87MG cells treated with the networked cationic polymer; (B) gene knockdown efficiency of polyplex
in FBS free DMEM medium (contained siRNA was 1 μg/well); (C) gene knockdown efficiency of polywraplex in DMEM
medium with FBS 10% (contained siRNA was 1 μg/well); (D) the NIR image of tissue distribution in tumor-bearing nude mice
administrated systemically after 24 h of each group: (a) naked siRNA, (b) Cy5-siRNA polyplex and (c) Cy5-siRNA polywraplex.

chemical bonds relative to the PEI which was linked more
stably in low pH environments [5].

3.7.
Determination of VEGFA gene silencing of polyplex
and polywraplex in U87MG cells using qPCR
When polyplexes formed in a series of mass ratio were
used to transfect vascular endothelial growth factor A
silence siRNA(anti-VEGFA siRNA) into U87 MG cells, the
one (wcationic polymer /wsiRNA = 7//1) showed the higher silence
ability at lower mass ratio than the other groups in FBS free
medium shown in Fig. 5B. So this mass ratio was selected
to construct the next step formulation (polywraplex). In the
10% FBS medium, polywraplex demonstrated more efficiently
silencing effect compared to other groups, as shown in
Fig. 5C. The results indicated that the polywraplex coated
with surface triblock copolymer could prevent siRNA from
degrading and transfect the gene into the U87MG cells, which
were consistent with intracellular uptake and distribution
experiment.

3.8.

Distribution of Cy5-labeled siRNA in vivo

Each of siRNA formulation demonstrated different organtargeted affinity shown in Fig. 5D. Naked siRNA was prone to
accumulating and clearing in kidney since its particle size less
than 10 nm could pass the glomerular filtration. The cationic
polyplex mainly accumulated in liver for its particle size
about 100 nm according to EPR effect. The polywraplex group
showed the most fluorescent intensity in tumor than the
other groups, because that its neutralized and PEG-stabilized
surface were facilitated to be trapped by tumor according to
EPR effect.

3.9.

In vivo tumor suppression

As shown in Fig. 6A, polywraplex group demonstrated
significant difference compared to saline group and Naked
siRNA group, owning the largest reduction in volume of the
tumor. The body weight curve of mice in Fig. 6B shows that the
differentiation of each group is not significant and no mice
died during the experiment. As shown in Fig. 6C and 6D, both
the weight and images of tumors from polywraplex group
showed the lowest volume in all experiment groups, which
indicated that the polywraplex siRNA system can efficiently
deliver the siRNA to the tumor tissues. The average tumor
relative weights for the four experiment groups were 100%,
91%, 67%, and 39%, respectively, shown in Fig. 6C. The results
indicated that polywraplex with triblock surface membrane
could more efficiently deliver to tumor, which was consistent
with siRNA distribution experiment in vivo.

3.10.

Evaluation of anti-angiogenetic efficacy

The anti-angiogenetic efficacy of polywraplex loading antiVEGF siRNA was evaluated by calculating the nascent
capillary density. As shown in Fig. 7A, the microscopic images
of tumor slides, which stained with CD-31 antibody form each
group of mice receiving the four dosage forms, respectively
the capillary densities decreased significantly in polywraplex
group, compared to saline, naked siRNA and polyplex groups.
The average capillary densities of tumor slides for the four
groups were 169, 161, 101 and 47 spots/slides respectively,
which were equivalent to 100%, 95%, 59% and 27% as shown
in Fig. 7B. The results are more remarkable than the order of
tumor weight experiment shown in Fig. 6C. Anti-VEGFA siRNA
directly inhibits tumor angiogenesis, consequently, lead to

Fig. 6 – Results of Anti-tumor effect of U87MG tumor-bearing nude mice in vivo (Injection dosage of each mouse was
0.5 mg/Kg/time). (A) Growth volume curves of xenograft tumor; (B) Body weight and survival curves of mice; (C) Relative
tumor weight data and (D) photos of U87 MG tumors of each group: (a) saline, (b) naked siRNA, (c) polyplex, (d) polywraplex.
mean±SD (n = 6).

Fig. 7 – (A) Images of tumor sections stained by CD 31 antibody from four experiment group: (a) saline, (b) naked siRNA, (c)
polyplex, (d) polywraplex and (B) quantification of capillaries of tumor. mean±SD (n = 5). ∗∗ P < 0.01, ∗∗∗ P < 0.001.

a decrease of tumor weight and volume, which induced the
differentiation between capillary density and tumor weight
experiment.


Conclusion

In constructing size-customizable uni-molecular polyplex,
replacing the low molecular weight branched PEI with
dendrimers as the crosslinking junctions of the networked
cationic polymer may offer a better-defined structure
and electron microscopic visibility without changing the
chemistry. The Zeta potential-regulated polymerization selfterminated at pre-determined size; the formed networked
cationic polymer packed siRNA intramolecularly to form a
uni-molecular polyplex; and the cationic particle adsorbed
rationally designed tri-block copolymer to form a monolayer.
Biologic assays comprising poly-electrolytes induced siRNA
leaking, enzymatic degradation, and gene silencing activity
(in vitro and in vivo) confirmed the functional similarity of this
delivery carrier to that with PEI as the polymer crosslinking
junctions. The polywraplexes using dendrimer as the cationic
polymer crosslinkers may serve a useful model to feedback
the construction processes of synthetic carriers, and a
low generation dendrimer cationic polymer may serve as
formulation component.

Acknowledgments
These authors G.B. performed the research; G.B. and T.X.
drafted the manuscript; F.W. conceived the research, designed
the experiments together with G.B. and T.J., U.K.C. revised the
manuscript; J.F., XT.D. provided help in synthesis and animal
experiment. This study was financially supported by the
grant of the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant nos.
81373352 and 81690262). The authors appreciate the generous
help from the faculties of the Analytical Center of Shanghai
Jiao Tong University.


references

[1] Chen Y, Gao DY, Huang L. In vivo delivery of miRNAs for
cancer therapy: challenges and strategies. Adv Drug Deliv
Rev 2015;81:128–41.
[2] Juliano RL. The delivery of therapeutic oligonucleotides.
Nucleic Acids Res 2016;44(14):6518–48.
[3] Li Z, Rana TM. Therapeutic targeting of microRNAs: current
status and future challenges. Nat Rev Drug Discov
2014;13(8):622–38.
[4] Pack DW, Hoffman AS, Pun S, Stayton PS. Design and
development of polymers for gene delivery. Nat Rev Drug
Discov 2005;4(7):581–93.
[5] Duan SY, Ge XM, Lu N, Wu F, Yuan WE, Jin T. Synthetic
polyspermine imidazole-4,5-amide as an efficient and
cytotoxicity-free gene delivery system. Int J Nanomedicine
2012;7:3813–22.
[6] Santiago-Ortiz JL, Schaffer DV. Adeno-associated virus (AAV)
vectors in cancer gene therapy. J Control Rel
2016;240:287–301.
[7] Liu Y, Siriwon N, Rohrs JA, Wang P. Generation of targeted
Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors for human gene
therapy. Curr Pharm Des 2015;21(22):3248–56.
[8] Blessing D, Deglon N. Adeno-associated virus and lentivirus
vectors: a refined toolkit for the central nervous system. Curr
Opin Virol 2016;21:61–6.
[9] Yin H, Kanasty RL, Eltoukhy AA, Vegas AJ, Dorkin JR,
Anderson DG. Non-viral vectors for gene-based therapy. Nat
Rev Genet 2014;15(8):541–55.
[10] Slita A, Egoroua A, Casals E, Casalsa E, Kiselev A,
Rosenholma JM. Characterization of modified mesoporous
silica nanoparticles as vectors for siRNA delivery. Asian J
Pharm Sci 2018;13(6):592–9.

[11] Whitehead KA, Dorkin JR, Vegas AJ, Chang PH, Veiseh O,
Matthews J, et al. Degradable lipid nanoparticles with
predictable in vivo siRNA delivery activity. Nat Commun
2014;5:4277.
[12] Lv H, Zhang S, Wang B, Cui S, Yan J. Toxicity of cationic lipids
and cationic polymers in gene delivery. J Control Rel
2006;114(1):100–9.
[13] Hong CA, Eltoukhy AA, Lee H, Langer R, Anderson DG,
Nam YS. Dendrimeric siRNA for efficient gene silencing.
Angew Chem Int Ed 2015;54(23):6740–4.
[14] Liu J, Song L, Liu S, Zhao S, Jiang Q, Ding B. A tailored DNA
nanoplatform for synergistic RNAi-/chemotherapy of
multidrug-resistant tumors. Angew Chem Int Ed
2018;57(47):15486–90.
[15] Dowdy SF. Overcoming cellular barriers for RNA
therapeutics. Nat Biotechnol 2017;35(3):222–9.
[16] Feng J, Chen S, Ge XM, Wu F, Bai G, Jin T. Precise assembly of
synthetic carriers of siRNA through a series of interlocked
thermodynamically self-regulated processes. Adv Funct
Mater 2018;28(6):1703207.
[17] Duan S, Yuan W, Wu F, Jin T. Polyspermine
imidazole-4,5-imine, a chemically dynamic and biologically
responsive carrier system for intracellular delivery of siRNA.
Ange Chem Int Ed 2012;51(32):7938–41.
[18] Ge XM, Duan SY, Wu F, Feng J, Zhu H, Jin T. Polywraplex,
functionalized polyplexes by post-polyplexing assembly of a
rationally designed triblock copolymer membrane. Adv
Funct Mater 2015;25(27):4352–63.
[19] Maeda H, Wu J, Sawa T, Matsumura Y, Hori K. Tumor
vascular permeability and the EPR effect in macromolecular
therapeutics: a review. J Control Rel 2000;65(1–2):271–84.

End
