Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jpa

Review paper

Hollow ﬁber-based liquid phase microextraction followed by
analytical instrumental techniques for quantitative analysis of heavy
metal ions and pharmaceuticals
Wajid Ali Khan a, Muhammad Balal Arain a, b, **, Yadollah Yamini c, Nasrullah Shah a,
Tasneem Gul Kazi d, Stig Pedersen-Bjergaard e, *, Mohammad Tajik c
a

Department of Chemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, 23200, KPK, Pakistan
Department of Chemistry, University of Karachi, 75270, Karachi, Pakistan
Department of Chemistry, Tarbiat Modares University, P. O. Box 14115-175, Tehran, Iran
d
National Center of Excellence in Analytical Chemistry, University of Sindh, Jamshoro, 76080, Sindh, Pakistan
e
School of Pharmacy, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
b
c

article info

abstract

Article history:
Received 6 September 2019
Received in revised form
9 December 2019
Accepted 11 December 2019
Available online 12 December 2019

Hollow-ﬁber liquid-phase microextraction (HF-LPME) and electromembrane extraction (EME) are
miniaturized extraction techniques, and have been coupled with various analytical instruments for trace
analysis of heavy metals, drugs and other organic compounds, in recent years. HF-LPME and EME provide
high selectivity, efﬁcient sample cleanup and enrichment, and reduce the consumption of organic solvents to a few micro-liters per sample. HF-LPME and EME are compatible with different analytical instruments for chromatography, electrophoresis, atomic spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, and
electrochemical detection. HF-LPME and EME have gained signiﬁcant popularity during the recent years.
This review focuses on hollow ﬁber based techniques (especially HF-LPME and EME) of heavy metals and
pharmaceuticals (published 2017 to May 2019), and their combinations with atomic spectroscopy, UVVIS spectrophotometry, high performance liquid chromatography, gas chromatography, capillary electrophoresis, and voltammetry.
© 2019 Xi'an Jiaotong University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Keywords:
Hollow ﬁber liquid phase microextraction
Electromembrane extraction
Heavy metals
Pharmaceuticals
Instrumental techniques

1. Introduction
Most analytical methods include sample preparation prior to the
instrumental analysis. The purpose of the sample preparation is to
make the sample compatible with the analytical instrument, to
remove interfering matrix components and to enrich the target
analytes to a detectable level [1]. Different sample preparation
techniques are available, but liquid-liquid extraction (LLE) and
solid-phase extraction (SPE) have been the most popular ones [2].
For several decades, different microextraction variants of LLE and
SPE have been developed. This was originally motivated by
reduction or elimination of organic solvents [3] and was initiated by

Peer review under responsibility of Xi'an Jiaotong University.
* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author at: Department of Chemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, 23200, KPK, Pakistan.
E-mail addresses: bilal_ku2004@yahoo.com (M.B. Arain), stig.pedersenbjergaard@farmasi.uio.no (S. Pedersen-Bjergaard).

the invention of solid-phase microextraction (SPME) by Pawliszyn
et al. [4] and liquid-phase microextraction (LPME) by Jeannot and
Cantwell [5]. Since the introduction of these innovative sample
preparation methods, a variety of SPME and LPME methods have
been reported in the literature. Head-space solid phase microextraction (HS-SPME), in-tube solid phase microextraction (ITSPME), thin-ﬁlm solid phase microextraction (TF-SPME), headspace liquid phase microextraction (HS-LPME), liquid-liquid
microextraction based on solidiﬁcation of ﬂoating organic droplet
(LLME-SFO), and dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction (DLLME)
are examples in this direction [6e11]. While SPME has become
commercially available, LPME is still performed with laboratory
built devices. In spite of this, LPME is still a very active area of
research for reasons including 1) simplicity, 2) costs, 3) green
chemistry, 4) selectivity, and 5) method sensitivity. Fig. 1 illustrates
different conﬁgurations and approaches to LPME. LPME was originally performed as single drop microextraction (SDME) [12]. SDME
is still under development, but in this approach the stability of the
droplet of organic solvent may be an issue.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpha.2019.12.003
2095-1779/© 2019 Xi'an Jiaotong University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

110

W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122

Fig. 1. Classiﬁcation of liquid phase microextraction techniques.

Considering these limitations, hollow ﬁber protected liquid
phase microextraction (HF-LPME) was introduced in 1999 [13]. In
the ﬁrst paper, HF-LPME was utilized for preconcentration and
extraction of pharmaceuticals prior to electrophoretic identiﬁcation and determination. An aqueous extraction solvent was injected
into the lumen of a porous polypropylene hollow ﬁber membrane,
while the porous wall was impregnated by an organic supported
liquid membrane (SLM). As the extraction solvent (acceptor phase)
was not in direct contact with the sample solution, the extraction
system was stable, and highly efﬁcient sample cleanup was achieved with this innovative strategy. HF-LPME can be utilized for
quantitative analysis from very complex environmental and biological samples [14].
A typical HF-LPME setup consists of a porous hollow ﬁber
membrane made of polypropylene, polytetraﬂuoroethylene, and
polyvinylidene ﬂuoride, which is impregnated with an organic
solvent. The solvent is immobilized in the pores in the wall of the
hollow ﬁber membrane and serves as supported liquid membrane
(SLM) [15]. The acceptor phase can be either an aqueous solution or
an organic solvent. Due to this ﬂexibility, HF-LPME is compatible
with most analytical instruments for chromatography, electrophoresis, molecular and atomic spectrometry, and electrochemistry. The current review discusses recent applications of HF-based
microextraction for pharmaceutical and heavy metal applications,
and on their compatibility with different instrumental methods.
2. Principles and possible modes of the HF-LPME
In HF-based LPME methods, the extraction phase is placed in the
lumen of a porous hollow ﬁber. In such a way, the acceptor phase is
protected by the SLM. To perform HF-LPME, a polypropylene hollow ﬁber membrane may ﬁrst be sonicated in acetone to remove
polymer impurities [16]. Then the hollow ﬁber membrane is soaked
in an impregnating solvent to ﬁll the pores of the HF membrane by
capillary forces, and excess solvent may be removed by washing
with distilled water [17]. After this step, the lumen of the hollow
ﬁber is ﬁlled with the acceptor phase. As is thoroughly discussed
below, the acceptor phase can be the same organic solvent as the
SLM (the two-phase mode) or can be an aqueous solution (the
three-phase mode). Finally, the hollow ﬁber is immersed in the
sample solution and the analytes are extracted from the sample,

through the SLM and into the acceptor phase [18]. Four different
arrangements for HF-LPME have been reported, i.e., rod like, ushaped, hollow-ﬁber solvent bar, and knotted hollow-ﬁber.
Considering the physicochemical characteristics of the desired
analytes and levels of complexity of the sample, HF-LPME can be
performed in a two- or three-phase mode.
2.1. Two-phase HF-LPME
In two-phase HF-LPME, the pores in the wall of the hollow ﬁber
and the lumen are ﬁlled with an organic solvent, which is immiscible with the aqueous sample solution. Solvents like 1-octanol and
dihexyl ether are commonly used [19]. Two-phase HF-LPME is
applied for extraction and preconcentration of analytes with low
polarity such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Since the
analytes are extracted into an organic solvent, two-phase LPME is
compatible with gas chromatography. Fig. 2 illustrates the principle
of two-phase HF-LPME. According to this the SLM and the organic
acceptor phase are the same in two-phase HF-LPME.
2.2. Three-phase HF-LPME
In three-phase LPME, the pores in the wall of the hollow ﬁber
are ﬁlled with an organic solvent immiscible with water, while the
lumen is ﬁlled with aqueous solution (acceptor solution). 1-Octanol
and Dihexylether are common solvents [20]. The mechanism of
extraction is based on pH adjustment of the sample solution and
the aqueous acceptor phase. For instance, extraction of acidic
compounds is achieved by acidiﬁcation of the sample to suppress
ionization of the target analytes. This results in successful transfer
of analytes towards the acceptor phase through the organic SLM.
pH of the aqueous acceptor solution should be adjusted to a pH
value 2e3 units above pKa of the analyte.
Carrier mediated three-phase HF-LPME was introduced where a
hydrophobic carrier was dissolved in the organic SLM before the
impregnation of the HF pores [21]. The applied carrier is an organic
compound capable of ion-pairing with analytes of interest. Hence,
at the contact region between the sample solution and the SLM, the
desired ion-pair complexes are formed, leading to successful
extraction of target analytes. At the contact region between the
SLM and the aqueous acceptor phase, the analyte is exchanged with

W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122

111

Fig. 2. A schematic mechanism of the two-phase HF-LPME.

a suitable inorganic counter ion dissolved in the acceptor solution,
and is released into the acceptor solution.
As mentioned, three-phase HF-LPME can be applied for ionizable compounds (acids and bases). Two-phase HF-LPME offers high
PFs and extraction efﬁciencies for non-polar analytes. However,
because the SLM and the acceptor phase are the same organic
solvent, there is no phase boundary. Therefore, cleanup is limited.
Interestingly, Ghambarian et al. introduced a variant where ndodecane was used as the organic SLM, while organic solvents like
methanol, ethanol, or acetonitrile, which are all immiscible with ndodecane, were used as acceptor phase [22]. This strategy provided
improved sample clean-up, while extraction efﬁciency was not
sacriﬁced. Fig. 3 illustrates the principles of three-phase HF-LPME.
HF-LPME can be carried out through static, dynamic, and even
fully automated strategies. One of the most interesting approaches
for dynamic HF-LPME was introduced by Esraﬁli et al. called TTextraction [23]. Between two T connectors, a stainless-steel tube
was mounted, housing the hollow ﬁber membrane. The sample
solution was pumped into the TT-extractor through the two T

connectors, while the acceptor phase was injected into the hollow
ﬁber membrane via a syringe pump. This conﬁguration was capable
of carrying out two-phase HF-LPME. Fig. 4 illustrates this innovative approach with all the details. In another strategy offered by the
same research group, a fully automated HF-LPME with capability
for two- and three-phase HF-LPME procedures was developed. In
this setup, a syringe pump was used for washing, ﬁlling, and
ejection of different solvents. Four containers were used for
washing solvent, SLM, extraction solvent, and elution solvent. The
extraction system was successfully connected with liquid chromatography. Fig. 5 shows the graphical design of this HF-LPME
instrument [24].
2.3. Electromembrane extraction
In HF-LPME, mass transfer is by passive diffusion and this results
in relatively slow extraction kinetics. Alternatively, ionizable compounds can be extracted efﬁciently and with outstanding sample
cleanup by electromembrane extraction (EME) [25]. The principle
W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122

of EME is similar to that of HF-LPME. However, in EME the analytes
are extracted selectively in their charged form under the inﬂuence
of an electrical ﬁeld. Thus mass transfer is by electrokinetic
migration across the SLM, and 2-nitrophenyl octyl ether (NPOE) is
often used as SLM. The setup for EME is very similar to three-phase
HF-LPME, but in EME two electrodes (usually platinum wires) are
utilized. One electrode is placed in the acceptor phase into the
hollow ﬁber lumen, while the second electrode is inserted into the
sample solution. Fig. 6 shows the principle of EME.
For extraction of basic analytes, the cathode (-) is placed inside
the acceptor phase, while for acidic analytes the direction of the
electrical ﬁeld is reversed [18]. After extraction, the acceptor phase
is collected with a micro-syringe and injected into an analytical
instrument for quantitative analysis. Due to the electrical ﬁeld
across the SLM, bubble formation, Joule heating, and even punctuation of SLM may occur in EME systems operated under nonoptimal conditions. These phenomena occur in longer extraction
times as a result of excessive migration of ions across SLM. Also,
when the electrical ﬁeld is applied, electrical double layers and

local pH gradients are formed in the interfaces between the SLM
and the aqueous solutions on both side. These may impact the mass
transfer. To reduce the impact of these phenomena, application of
constant direct electrical current and application of pulsed voltage
have been reported [26]. Although the utilization of a stabilized and
constant direct current improved the efﬁciency and stability of
EME, this approach is still not common in EME publications. Pulsed
electromembrane extraction (PEME) was introduced as a strategy
to enhance the efﬁciency of EME using a simple and inexpensive
extraction setup [27]. Pulsed voltage was found to improve
extraction efﬁciency and system stability.
3. Operational parameters of HF-LPME and EME
The type of hollow-ﬁber membrane, type of extraction solvent,
pH of donor and acceptor phases, extraction time, stirring rate, salt
addition, and temperature are important parameters in HF-LPME
and EME. Applied voltage and electrode material, thickness, and
distance are additional parameters affecting EME performance.

W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122

113

Fig. 6. A schematic mechanism for electromembrane extraction.

3.1. Hollow-ﬁber membrane
The porous wall of the hollow-ﬁber serves as support for the
SLM. The SLM solvent should be of low polarity and immiscible
with water. For immobilization of such low-polarity solvents, the
hollow-ﬁber should be of hydrophobic material [28]. In most cases,
polypropylene hollow-ﬁber membranes have been used. Such
hollow-ﬁbers are commercially available at a low price. Therefore,
each hollow-ﬁber membrane is used only for a single extraction
and is then discarded. Alternatively, polyvinylidene diﬂuoride
hollow-ﬁber membranes can be used [14].
3.2. Supported liquid membrane (SLM)
The solvent selected for the SLM plays a major role for the stability and the efﬁciency of the extraction system both in HF-LPME
and EME. First, the solvent should be non-volatile in order to
avoid evaporation, and solvents with boiling point exceeding
200  C are recommended. Second, the solvent should be immiscible
with water in order to avoid leakage to the sample. Usually solvents
with water solubility less than 0.5 mg/mL are recommended. Third,
the solvent should facilitate efﬁcient mass transfer of target analyte
[14]. In HF-LPME, high efﬁciency can often be obtained with a variety of organic solvents. Common organic solvents for HF-LPME
include n-dihexyl ether, 1-octanol, dodecyl acetate, and toluene.
Ionic liquids have also been used as SLM solvent in HF-LPME [28]. In
EME, the type of solvent used for the SLM is much more critical
[29]. This is due to the fact that analyte molecules are charged when
entering the organic SLM, and partition is voltage dependent.
Common organic solvents used in EME are 2enitrophenyloctyl
ether (NPOE) and 1-octanol.
3.3. Sample and acceptor pH
Sample and acceptor pH plays a major role both in HF-LPME and
EME. In HF-LPME, the analyte is extracted in neutral form into the
SLM, while it is ionized in contact with the acceptor. Therefore, for
extraction of basic analytes, the sample should be alkaline, while
the acceptor should be acidic or neutral (depending on analyte pKavalue). For HF-LPME of acidic analytes, the pH gradient is reversed
using acidic conditions in the sample and alkaline or neutral conditions in the acceptor [30,31]. In EME, the analytes are ionized in

the entire extraction system. Thus, for basic analytes, both the
sample and the acceptor are neutral or acidic. For acidic analytes,
EME is conducted with neutral or alkaline conditions in sample and
acceptor [32]. Due to local pH effects [33] at the SLM boundary
layers, pH in the acceptor solution is critical in EME, and for basic
analytes pH should be no less than three units above pKa. In
addition, pH may change in the sample and acceptor during EME
due to electrolysis [34], and therefore buffers are recommended in
both sample and acceptor.
3.4. Extraction time
Both HF-LPME and EME are equilibrium techniques. This implies
that extraction recovery increases rapidly versus time during initial
extraction, and after a certain period of time, the systems enter
equilibrium. Thus, from a theoretical point of view, recovery is
constant from this point forward and extraction is terminated.
Equilibrium time is typically in the range 30e60 min for HF-LPME
depending on the chemical properties of the analytes and the geometry of the system [35]. For EME, equilibrium time is shorter, due
to the electro-kinetic mass transfer, and ranges typically from 5 to
15 min. In EME, recoveries may drop during prolonged extraction
due to pH changes in sample and acceptor, and due to instability of
the SLM [36].
3.5. Stirring/agitation
HF-LPME and EME are performed under stirring or agitation
conditions. By such, convection is induced in the sample and analyte mass transfer to the SLM is facilitated. In addition, stirring or
agitation reduces the boundary layer thickness at the sample/SLM
interface, and this is very important for efﬁcient mass transfer [31].
The optimal stirring or agitation rate is geometry dependent, and is
normally optimized during method development. Typically, stirring or agitation in the range 500e1000 rpm is used. At higher
rates, air bubbles are often formed, and this can reduce extraction
performance [37].
3.6. Salt addition
Addition of salt to the sample affects the efﬁciency of HF-LPME
and EME. In HF-LPME, the addition of salt to the sample solution

114

W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122

often increases the extraction efﬁciency [38,39]. The increase in
extraction efﬁciency is due to increased ionic strength in the
sample, which increases analyte partition into the organic SLM.
However, negative effects of salt in the samples are also reported
[40,41]. This may be due to changes in the Nernst diffusion ﬁlm
controlling the diffusion rate of analytes into the acceptor phase
[42,43]. Typical salt additions are 5%e30% (w/v) [44]. In EME,
addition of salt to the sample is normally not performed. For efﬁcient EME, a low ion balance may be favorable under certain conditions [45e47]. The ion balance is deﬁned as the ratio between the
total amount of ions in the sample and the total amount of ions in
the acceptor phase.
3.7. Temperature
HF-LPME and EME are normally performed at room temperature. Both extraction modes are affected by temperature. Partition
coefﬁcients decrease with the increase in temperature, while
diffusion across the SLM increases. Temperatures up to 40 C have
been used, but above this temperature SLMs tend to be less stable
[37,48].
3.8. Electrodes (EME)
Platinum is normally used as inert electrode material in EME.
The electrode thickness plays a key role in EME. The internal
diameter of the electrodes should be substantially less than the
inner diameter of the hollow ﬁber in order not to displace acceptor
phase. The distance between the electrodes is another important
parameter [49].
3.9. Applied voltage (EME)
Generally, the extraction efﬁciency in EME increases with the
increasing voltage up to a certain level. Above this, there is no
further gain in extraction efﬁciency, and mass transfer is no longer
limited by the voltage. Voltages applied in EME normally range
from 5 to 300 V. Voltages exceeding 300 V are not recommended,
due to instability of the extraction system and generation of gas
bubbles (electrolysis) [37].

microﬂuidic paper-based analytical device (mPAD) for extraction
of Cr (VI). The membrane was impregnated in a mixture of Aliquat
336 and 1-octanol for 1 min. The acceptor phase was collected for
colorimetric analysis after EME, and DPC reagent was added. For
quantitative analysis a scanner was used and colored images were
analyzed with RGB. The results were compared with ICP-AES and
found in good agreement [57].
4.1.2. UVevisible spectrophotometry
UVevisible spectrophotometry has been commonly selected as
instrumental technique for quantitative analysis of heavy metals,
highly conjugated organic compounds, and biological macromolecules due to easy availability, simplicity, versatility, speed, accuracy,
precision, and cost-effectiveness. However, in complex samples the
analytes cannot be measured directly with a UVevisible spectrophotometer due to low concentration. Therefore a sample preparation step is necessary to improve selectivity and sensitivity.
Atikarnsakul et al. presented an EME procedure for preconcentration and extraction of Cr(VI). Polypropylene hollow ﬁber membrane
was impregnated with NPOE and used for EME. For quantitative
analysis, a speciﬁc volume of acceptor phase was mixed with a
speciﬁc concentration of DPC and acidiﬁed with dilute H2SO4. The
resultant red-violet solution was analyzed with a ﬁber optic
ultravioletevisible spectrophotometer with a Z-ﬂow cell at 544 nm
[61].
Onac et al. introduced a new approach to preconcentration and
extraction of Cr(VI). A polymer inclusion membrane was synthesized and used as SLM for EME. The polymer inclusion membrane
impregnated with NPOE contained calix [4]arene. The EME process
was performed under constant current instead of constant voltage
to control the extraction of charged species. The use of constant
current in EME provided high reproducibility and mechanical stability. The formation of metal-calix [4]arene ion pair at the
membrane-aqueous phase interface enhanced the transport of
metal-complex ion through the membrane. Bath-water of chrome
plating industry was used as real sample for analysis to check the
selectivity of calix [4]arene towards Cr(VI) [62]. Table 1 summarizes
examples on research combining hollow ﬁber based extraction
techniques with UVeVis spectrophotometry [61e65].
4.2. Pharmaceuticals
4. Instrumental techniques coupled with HF-LPME and EME
4.1. Heavy metals determination
4.1.1. Atomic spectrometry
Combinations of hollow ﬁber based techniques and atomic
spectroscopic techniques have mainly been used for detection of
heavy metals in environmental, clinical, and biological samples,
petroleum products, pharmaceuticals, and in food [50]. The hollow
ﬁber based techniques coupled with atomic spectrometric techniques for preconcentration and determination of different heavy
metals are summarized in Table 1 [51e60]. HF-LPME has been
coupled to ﬂame atomic absorption spectroscopy (FAAS) and
graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry (GFAAS) for
metal analysis [51e55]. In one example, Tahmasebi et al. introduced a new approach to the extraction of Cr (VI) based on EME
coupled with electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
(ETAAS). Before using the hollow ﬁber membrane as SLM, polyaniline nanoparticles were coated on the surface to increase the
selectivity for the extraction of Cr(VI). The polyaniline reinforced
hollow ﬁber selectively extracted Cr (VI) from real samples via
anion exchange. The surface area of the nanostructure coated polyaniline increased the preconcentration of the target analyte [56].
In another example Alahmad et al. introduced an HF-LPME

4.2.1. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
Three-phase HF-LPME and EME are ideal for acidic and basic
drugs. In three-phase HF-LPME, the acceptor phase is an aqueous
solution, and this can be injected directly into HPLC systems
without previous evaporation and reconstitution [30]. For extraction of basic analytes in HF-LPME, pH of donor phase must be kept
alkaline to suppress the ionization and solubility of the analyte,
whereas pH for acceptor phase should be acidic. In case of acidic
analytes, the pH gradient across the SLM is reversed [30,31]. For
extraction of basic analytes in EME, pH of donor and acceptor
phases are kept acidic to ionize the analytes. The anode is placed in
the donor phase, while the cathode is placed in the acceptor phase
to facilitate the migration of analyte. In case of acidic analytes, the
donor and acceptor phases are made alkaline and the direction of
the electrical ﬁeld is reversed [30,32]. Three-phase systems provide
better degree of clean-up than two phase systems due to the fact
that most water soluble components do not pass through the SLM.
Khan et al. presented a new strategy for selective and simultaneous extraction of three drugs with different hydrophobicity
property. The EME process was carried out in a microﬂuidic chip
device. The microﬂuidic device consisted of three PMMA plates
having M shaped microchannels. The middle PMMA plate provided
a ﬂow path for sample solution and was in contact with two

EME: Electro-membrane extraction, HFLPME: Hollow ﬁber liquid phase microextraction, IEME: In-tube electro-membrane extraction, CM-HFLPME: carrier-mediated hollow ﬁber liquid phase microextraction, DEHP: bis(2ethylhexyl) phosphate, CTAB: N,N,N-cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide, APDC: Ammonium pyrroldinedithiocarbamate, PANI: Polyanniline, DDTC: Diethyldithiocarbamate, PAN: 1-(2-pyridylazo)-2-naphthol), NPOE: 2nitrophenyl octyl ether, FAAS: Flame atomic absorption spectroscopy, GFAAS: Graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry, ETV-ICP-OES: Electrothermal vaporization inductive couple plasma optical emission spectroscopy, RGB/ ICP-AES: Red Green Blue Analysis/ inductive couple plasma atomic emission spectroscopy.

Phthalate- and nitrilebased organic solvents

HFDLLME: Hollow ﬁber dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction, HFLSPME: Hollow ﬁber liquid solid phase microextraction, PEME: Pulsed electromembrane extraction, CF-EME: Continuous-ﬂow electromembrane extraction,
LPME: Liquid phase microextraction, HFM-MI-MSPE: Hollow ﬁber membrane-molecular imprinted-micro solid phase microextraction, FMLPE: Flat membrane based liquid phase microextraction, CAeHFeSLPME: Cetyl-alcoholreinforced hollow ﬁber solid/ liquid phase microextraction, MIP-HFME: Molecular imprinted polymer hollow ﬁber microextraction, DEHPi: Bis(2-ethylhexyl) phosphite, TFPBA: 4-(triﬂuoromethyl)phenylboronic acid, RGO:
Reduced graphene oxide, TBP: Tributyl phosphate, DHE: Dihexyl ether, PIM: Polymer inclusion membrane, TOPO: Trioctylphosphine oxide HPLC-UV: High performance liquid chromatography with UV detector, HPLC-MS: High
performance liquid chromatography with mass spectrometry, HPLC-DAD-FLD: High performance liquid chromatography with diode array detector and ﬂuorescence detector, HPLC-UV-MS: High performance liquid chromatography with UV detector and mass spectrometry, UHPLC-MS: Ultra high performance liquid chromatography with mass spectrometry, HPLC-DAD: High performance liquid chromatography with diode array detector,
Fluorometer/RGB/ HPLC-UV: Fluorometer/ Red Green Blue analysis/ High performance liquid chromatography with UV detector.

EME-EALLME: Electromembrane extraction and electro-assisted liquid-liquid microextraction, EM-SPME: Electromembrane surrounded solid phase microextraction, G-EME/DLLME: Gel-electromembrane exraction / dispersive
liquid-liquid microextraction, Pa-EME: Parallel electromembrane extraction, ENB: 1-ethyl-2-nitrobenzene, MWCNTs: Multi-walled carbon nanotubes, MIL-110(Cr): Chromium terephthalate metal-organic framework, Span-80:
Mono-(9Z)-9-octadecenoate, CuNPs: Copper nanoparticles, GC-FID: Gas chromatography with ﬂame ionization detector,CE-UV: Capillary electrophoresis with UV detector, CE-DAD: Capillary electrophoresis with diode array
detector, FFSSWV: Fast Fourier transform stripping square wave voltammetry, SFFTCCV: Stripping fast Fourier transform continuous cyclic voltammetry, DPV: Differential pulse voltammetry, FFTSWV: Fast Fourier transform
square wave voltammetry.

W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122

Instrumental technique

W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122

different SLMs and acceptor phases. A stainless steel electrode was
embedded in the middle plate, dedicated for the ﬂow of sample
solution. Stainless steel electrodes were also embedded in the two
PMMA plates dedicated for the two acceptor phases. Based on
different SLMs, drugs of different hydrophobicity were extracted
into two acceptor phases and analyzed with HPLC-UV [66].
n-Hidalgo et al. introduced a new
In another example, Roma
biopolymeric membrane for EME of NSAIDs and acidic compounds.
The chitosan biopolymeric membrane was synthesized by mixing
chitosan 60% (w/w) and Aliquat®336 40% (w/w). The synthesized
membrane was characterized with scanning electron microscopy
(SEM). The prepared membrane was impregnated with a suitable
organic solvent and used as SLM in a home-made device. After EME,
the acceptor phase was analyzed with HPLC-DAD for quantitative
analysis [67]. Table 2 summarizes examples on research combining
hollow ﬁber based extraction techniques with HPLC [66e109].
4.2.2. Gas chromatography (GC)
GC has been coupled with two-phase HF-LPME and EME for
analysis of neutral, low and medium polar analytes. In two phase
systems the acceptor solution is the same organic solvent as used
for impregnation of membrane. Due to the fact that the acceptor
phase is organic, it can be injected directly in GC [109]. An EMESPME technique were introduced by Shamsayei et al. [110] for the
extraction and determination of cyproheptadine and ketotifen. In
this work, the surface of a stainless steel wire was electrochemically
deposited with polypyrrole and manganese dioxide using cyclic
voltammetry. A segment of polypropylene membrane was
impregnated with a suitable organic solvent and ﬁlled with water
as an acceptor phase. The prepared SPME ﬁber (electrochemically
prepared stainless steel wire) was introduced into the membrane
and used as a cathode. The cathode comprising the SLM and the
acceptor solution was directed into donor solution. A platinum
anode was directed into the sample solution. After EME, the SPME
ﬁber was analyzed with GC [110].
Similarly Tabani et al. presented a new approach to preconcentration and determination of basic drugs. An agarose gel
EME method was combined with dispersive liquideliquid microextraction (DLLME) technique. For extraction of target analytes, an
agarose-based gel membrane was synthesized and used for EME.
After EME, acceptor phase was collected and mixed with 1 mM
NaOH solution. DLLME was carried out from this solution and the
ﬁnal organic extract was analyzed with GC [111]. Table 3 summarizes information on research combining HF-LPME and EME with
GC [110e131].
4.2.3. Capillary electrophoresis (CE)
CE is another analytical instrument which has frequently been
coupled with three-phase HF-LPME and EME [30]. To avoid band
broadening (de-stacking), the ionic strength of the acceptor phase
should not exceed the ionic strength of the CE separation buffer
k et al. presented a new semi-automated-mEME tech[132]. Dvora
nique for extraction of drugs coupled with CE. A three phase
disposable microextraction unit was constructed, in which a free
liquid membrane was sandwiched between acceptor and donor
phases. All liquid samples (acceptor phase, FLM, and donor phase)
were handled with a programmable syringe pump. After EME, the
acceptor phase was collected by switching the syringe pump to
infusion mode. The collected acceptor phase was quantitatively
analyzed with CE [113].
 et al. investigated the effect of membrane thickness on
Rysava
the extraction efﬁciency in EME [123]. Three polypropylene
membranes with different thickness were used as SLMs for EME
preconcentration of basic drugs. In this experiment, it was
concluded that the transfer of analytes across the membrane is

119

inversely proportional to the membrane thickness. Recent studies
of EME and HF-LPME coupled with CE are mentioned in Table 3
[113e124].
4.2.4. Voltammetry
One of the most important and widely used electroanalytical
techniques is voltammetry [133], and for quantiﬁcation of heavy
metals anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV) has been combined
with HF-LPME. The major advantage of ASV over other voltammetric techniques is the step of pre-concentration onto the electrode surface [134]. Anodic stripping voltammetry has low
detection limits, high sensitivity and selectivity as compared to
other electrochemical techniques. Detection limits with anodic
stripping voltammetry of heavy metals are in the ppm range [135].
To the best of our knowledge (2017 to May-2019), there is only one
research article on voltammetric instrumental technique for
quantiﬁcation of heavy metals using HF-LPME or EME preconcentration. For pharmaceuticals, several new approaches based on
hollow ﬁber based techniques have been reported. In one example,
Hrdli
cka et al. presented an HF-LPME method for extraction and
determination of vanillylmandelic acid combined with DPV. In this
study, a 20 mm polypropylene hollow ﬁber membrane was soaked
in an organic solvent to impregnate the pores. The excess organic
solvent was removed by air with a syringe. The lumen of the ﬁber
was ﬁlled with acceptor phase and sealed in both ends. The prepared membrane was fully immersed in sample solution and stirred with a magnetic bar. After EME, the acceptor phase was
collected and transferred to the surface of working electrode for
DPV analysis [131].
Tahmasebi et al. reported a novel approach in EME for preconcentration and determination of propylthiouracil coupled with
DPV. CuNPs were synthesized for selective extraction of propylthiouracil, and coated on hollow ﬁber membrane. The coated CuNPs
increased mass transfer and selectivity of propylthiouracil due to
the high selectivity of CuNPs toward thiol group/sulfhydryl compounds. The high afﬁnity/selectivity of propylthiouracil towards
CuNPs was explained by the hard and soft acid-base theory. It was
concluded that nitrobenzene was the best choice for propylthiouracil extraction because alcoholic solvents such as 1-octanol and
2-ethylhexanol dissolved CuNPs. It was pointed out that this
approach was not applicable for acidic compounds [129]. Research
combining HF-LPME and EME with voltammetry is summarized in
Table 3 [125e131].
5. Conclusions and looking into the future
Since 1999, a larger number of reports have been published on
the development of HF-LPME. These efforts have documented HFLPME as a green sample preparation technique requiring only a
few microliters of organic solvent per sample. HF-LPME enables
high enrichment and excellent sample clean-up from biological and
environmental samples. In the three-phase mode, HF-LPME provides aqueous extracts which are directly injectable in HPLC. Due to
the protection of the acceptor phase by the SLM, HF-LPME is
amenable to highly complex samples such as plasma, whole blood,
urine, saliva, breast milk, tap water, surface water, pond water,
seawater, and soil slurries. HF-LPME shows great potential for
routine applications, but to enter this area commercial products
and automation are required. Also, generic methods have to be
developed to simplify method development.
EME has been developed in parallel to HF-LPME, but EME is less
mature. Although, EME provides the same advantages as HF-LPME,
the electrical ﬁeld open for additional perspectives. Thus, the
extraction is controlled by an external electrical ﬁeld, and selectivity may be tuned by the direction and magnitude of the electrical

120

W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122

ﬁeld, by the chemical composition of the SLM, and by pH in sample
and acceptor phase.
Both HF-LPME and EME are highly efﬁcient for extraction of
heavy metals and pharmaceuticals. The techniques are compatible
with a broad spectrum of chromatographic, spectroscopic, and
electroanalytical techniques. Future work should focus on automation and commercialization. In addition, the future may see
research on the use of green solvents, and SLMs modiﬁed with
metal nanoparticles (MNPs) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), which
may increase the extraction efﬁciency of targeted analytes.
Conﬂicts of interest
The authors declare that there are no conﬂicts of interest.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Higher education commission
of Pakistan (NRPU No.20e3925/R&D/NRPU/HEC/2014), PAK-US
science and technology cooperation (Pak-US No6-4/PAK-US/HEC/
2015/04) and Pakistan science foundation joint research projects
with MSRT, Iran (No. PSF-MSRT/Env/KP-AWKUM).
References
[1] L. Ramos, Critical overview of selected contemporary sample preparation
techniques, J. Chromatogr. A 1221 (2012) 84e98.
[2] M.-C. Hennion, Solid-phase extraction: method development, sorbents, and
coupling with liquid chromatography, J. Chromatogr. A 856 (1999) 3e54.
[3] Y. Saito, M. Imaizumi, K. Ban, et al., Development of miniaturized sample
preparation with ﬁbrous extraction media, J. Chromatogr. A 1025 (2004)
27e32.
[4] C.L. Arthur, J. Pawliszyn, Solid phase microextraction with thermal desorption using fused silica optical ﬁbers, Anal. Chem. 62 (1990) 2145e2148.
[5] M.A. Jeannot, F.F. Cantwell, Solvent microextraction into a single drop, Anal.
Chem. 68 (1996) 2236e2240.
[6] Z. Zhang, J. Pawliszyn, Headspace solid-phase microextraction, Anal. Chem.
65 (1993) 1843e1852.
[7] R. Eisert, J. Pawliszyn, Automated in-tube solid-phase microextraction
coupled to high-performance liquid chromatography, Anal. Chem. 69 (1997)
3140e3147.
[8] I. Bruheim, X. Liu, J. Pawliszyn, Thin-ﬁlm microextraction, Anal. Chem. 75
(2003) 1002e1010.
[9] G. Shen, H.K. Lee, Headspace liquid-phase microextraction of chlorobenzenes
in soil with gas chromatography-electron capture detection, Anal. Chem. 75
(2003) 98e103.
[10] H. Xu, Z. Ding, L. Lv, et al., A novel dispersive liquideliquid microextraction
based on solidiﬁcation of ﬂoating organic droplet method for determination
of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in aqueous samples, Anal. Chim. Acta
636 (2009) 28e33.
[11] M. Rezaee, Y. Assadi, M.-R. Milani Hosseini, et al., Determination of organic
compounds in water using dispersive liquideliquid microextraction,
J. Chromatogr. A 1116 (2006) 1e9.
[12] L.E. Vera-Avila, T. Rojo-Portillo, R. Covarrubias-Herrera, et al., Capabilities
and limitations of dispersive liquideliquid microextraction with solidiﬁcation of ﬂoating organic drop for the extraction of organic pollutants from
water samples, Anal. Chim. Acta 805 (2013) 60e69.
[13] S. Pedersen-Bjergaard, K.E. Rasmussen, Liquid liquid liquid microextraction for sample preparation of biological ﬂuids prior to capillary
electrophoresis, Anal. Chem. 71 (1999) 2650e2656.
[14] A.M.A. Alsharif, G.-H. Tan, Y.-M. Choo, et al., Efﬁciency of hollow ﬁber liquidphase microextraction chromatography methods in the separation of organic
compounds: a review, J. Chromatogr. Sci. 55 (2017) 378e391.
[15] M. Ghambarian, Y. Yamini, A. Esraﬁli, Developments in hollow ﬁber based
liquid-phase microextraction: principles and applications, Microchimi Acta
177 (2012) 271e294.
[16] H. Chen, J. Han, Y. Wang, et al., Hollow ﬁber liquid-phase microextraction of
cadmium (II) using an ionic liquid as the extractant, Microchim Acta 181
(2014) 1455e1461.
[17] J. Abulhassani, J.L. Manzoori, M. Amjadi, Hollow ﬁber based-liquid phase
microextraction using ionic liquid solvent for preconcentration of lead and
nickel from environmental and biological samples prior to determination by
electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry, J. Hazard Mater. 176 (2010)
481e486.
[18] A. Gjelstad, S. Pedersen-Bjergaard, K.F. Seip, Electromembrane extraction as a
rapid and selective miniaturized sample preparation technique for biological
ﬂuids, Bioanalysis 7 (2015) 2203e2209.

[19] A. Esraﬁli, M. Baharfar, M. Tajik, et al., Two-phase hollow ﬁber liquid-phase
microextraction, TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. (Reference Ed.) 108 (2018)
314e322.
[20] K. Folde Bårdstu, T.S. Ho, K.E. Rasmussen, et al., Supported liquid membranes
in hollow ﬁber liquid-phase microextraction (LPME)ePractical considerations in the three-phase mode, J. Sep. Sci. 30 (2007) 1364e1370.
[21] S. Shariati, Y. Yamini, A. Esraﬁli, Carrier mediated hollow ﬁber liquid phase
microextraction combined with HPLCeUV for preconcentration and determination of some tetracycline antibiotics, J. Chromatogr. B 877 (2009)
393e400.
[22] M. Ghambarian, Y. Yamini, A. Esraﬁli, Three-phase hollow ﬁber microextraction based on two immiscible organic solvents for determination of
tricyclic antidepressant drugs: comparison with conventional three-phase
hollow ﬁber microextraction, J. Chromatogr. A 1222 (2012) 5e12.
[23] A. Esraﬁli, Y. Yamini, M. Ghambarian, et al., A novel approach to automation
of dynamic hollow ﬁber liquid-phase microextraction, J. Sep. Sci. 34 (2011)
957e964.
[24] A. Esraﬁli, Y. Yamini, M. Ghambarian, et al., Automated preconcentration and
analysis of organic compounds by on-line hollow ﬁber liquid-phase
microextractionehigh performance liquid chromatography, J. Chromatogr.
A 1262 (2012) 27e33.
[25] S. Pedersen-Bjergaard, K.E. Rasmussen, Electrokinetic migration across artiﬁcial liquid membranes: new concept for rapid sample preparation of biological ﬂuids, J. Chromatogr. A 1109 (2006) 183e190.

, P. Kub
 , P. Bo
[26] A. Slampov
a
an
cek, Electromembrane extraction using stabilized constant d.c. electric currentda simple tool for improvement of
extraction performance, J. Chromatogr. A 1234 (2012) 32e37.
[27] M. Rezazadeh, Y. Yamini, S. Seidi, et al., Pulsed electromembrane extraction:
a new concept of electrically enhanced extraction, J. Chromatogr., A 1262
(2012) 214e218.
[28] V. Shariﬁ, A. Abbasi, A. Nosrati, Application of hollow ﬁber liquid phase
microextraction and dispersive liquideliquid microextraction techniques in
analytical toxicology, J. Food Drug Anal. 24 (2016) 264e276.
[29] V. Krishna Marothu, M. Gorrepati, R. Vusa, Electromembrane extractionda
novel extraction technique for pharmaceutical, chemical, clinical and environmental analysis, J. Chromatogr. Sci. 51 (2013) 619e631.
[30] J. Płotka-Wasylka, K. Owczarek, J. Namiesnik, Modern solutions in the ﬁeld of
microextraction using liquid as a medium of extraction, TrAC Trends Anal.
Chem. (Reference Ed.) 85 (2016) 46e64.
[31] K.E. Rasmussen, S. Pedersen-Bjergaard, Developments in hollow ﬁbre-based,
liquid-phase microextraction, TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. (Reference Ed.) 23
(2004) 1e10.
[32] M. Rezazadeh, Y. Yamini, S. Seidi, Electromembrane extraction of trace
amounts of naltrexone and nalmefene from untreated biological ﬂuids,
J. Chromatogr. B 879 (2011) 1143e1148.
[33] L. Vårdal, E.L. Øiestad, A. Gjelstad, et al., Electromembrane extraction of
substances with weakly basic properties: a fundamental study with benzodiazepines, Bioanalysis 10 (2018) 769e781.
[34] C. Huang, Z. Chen, A. Gjelstad, et al., Electromembrane extraction, TrAC
Trends Anal. Chem. (Reference Ed.) 95 (2017) 47e56.
[35] E. Psillakis, N. Kalogerakis, Developments in liquid-phase microextraction,
TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. (Reference Ed.) 22 (2003) 565e574.
[36] C. Huang, K.F. Seip, A. Gjelstad, et al., Electromembrane extraction for
pharmaceutical and biomedical analysiseQuo vadis, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal.
113 (2015) 97e107.
[37] V. Krishna Marothu, M. Gorrepati, R. Vusa, Electromembrane extractionda
novel extraction technique for pharmaceutical, chemical, clinical and environmental analysis, J. Chromatogr. Sci. 51 (2013) 619e631.
[38] M. Ghambarian, Y. Yamini, A. Esraﬁli, Three-phase hollow ﬁber liquid-phase
microextraction based on two immiscible organic solvents for determination
of tramadol in urine and plasma samples, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 56 (2011)
1041e1045.

 pez, R. Fern
[39] M.R. Pay
an, M.A.B.
Lo
andez-Torres, et al., Hollow ﬁber-based
liquid phase microextraction (HF-LPME) as a new approach for the HPLC
determination of ﬂuoroquinolones in biological and environmental matrices,
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 55 (2011) 332e341.
[40] M.R. Hadjmohammadi, M. Soltani, Use of hollow ﬁber liquid phase microextraction and HPLC for extraction and determination of apigenin in human
urine after consumption of Satureja sahendica Bornm, J. Chromatogr. B 900
(2012) 85e88.
[41] K.M. Al Azzam, A. Makahleah, B. Saad, et al., Hollow ﬁber liquid-phase
microextraction for the determination of trace amounts of rosiglitazone
(anti-diabetic drug) in biological ﬂuids using capillary electrophoresis and
high performance liquid chromatographic methods, J. Chromatogr. A 1217
(2010) 3654e3659.
[42] V. Shariﬁ, A. Abbasi, A. Nosrati, Application of hollow ﬁber liquid phase
microextraction and dispersive liquideliquid microextraction techniques in
analytical toxicology, J. Food Drug Anal. 24 (2016) 264e276.
[43] J. Xiong, B. Hu, Comparison of hollow ﬁber liquid phase microextraction and
dispersive liquideliquid microextraction for the determination of organosulfur pesticides in environmental and beverage samples by gas chromatography with ﬂame photometric detection, J. Chromatogr. A 1193 (2008)
7e18.
[44] A. Saleh, Y. Yamini, M. Faraji, et al., Hollow ﬁber liquid phase microextraction
followed by high performance liquid chromatography for determination of

W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122

ultra-trace levels of Se (IV) after derivatization in urine, plasma and natural
water samples, J. Chromatogr. B 877 (2009) 1758e1764.
S. Seidi, Y. Yamini, A. Heydari, et al., Determination of thebaine in water
samples, biological ﬂuids, poppy capsule, and narcotic drugs, using electromembrane extraction followed by high-performance liquid chromatography
analysis, Anal. Chim. Acta 701 (2011) 181e188.
T.M. Middelthon-Bruer, A. Gjelstad, K.E. Rasmussen, et al., Parameters
affecting electro membrane extraction of basic drugs, J. Sep. Sci. 31 (2008)
753e759.
M. Balchen, T.G. Halvorsen, L. Reubsaet, et al., Rapid isolation of angiotensin
peptides from plasma by electromembrane extraction, J. Chromatogr. A 1216
(2009) 6900e6905.

cek, Electric ﬁeld-enhanced transport across
phase boundaries and membranes and its potential use in sample pretreatment for bioanalysis, Electrophoresis 31 (2010) 768e785.
Y. Yamini, S. Seidi, M. Rezazadeh, Electrical ﬁeld-induced extraction and
separation techniques: promising trends in analytical chemistryea review,
Anal. Chim. Acta 814 (2014) 1e22.
J. Sneddon, Determination of heavy metals in food by atomic spectroscopy,
Anal Endocr Disrup Comp Food (2011) 289.
S. Bahar, Z. Es’ haghi, A. Nezhadali, et al., An innovative method for analysis
of Pb (II) in rice, milk and water samples based on TiO2 reinforced caprylic
acid hollow ﬁber solid/liquid phase microextraction, Food Chem. 221 (2017)
1904e1910.
C. Zeng, Y. Yan, J. Tang, et al., Speciation of Arsenic (III) and Arsenic (V) based
on Triton X-100 hollow ﬁber liquid phase microextraction coupled with
ﬂame atomic absorption spectrometry, Spectrosc. Lett. 50 (2017) 220e226.
L. Boutorabi, M. Rajabi, M. Bazregar, et al., Selective determination of chromium (VI) ions using in-tube electro-membrane extraction followed by
ﬂame atomic absorption spectrometry, Microchem. J. 132 (2017) 378e384.
S. Salari, A. Bahrami, F. Ghamari, et al., Multivariate optimization of the
hollow ﬁber-based liquid phase microextraction of lead in human blood and
urine samples using graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry,
Chem. Pap. 72 (2018) 1945e1952.
M.A. Kamyabi, A. Aghaei, A simple and selective approach for determination
of trace Hg (II) using electromembrane extraction followed by graphite
furnace atomic absorption spectrometry, Spectrochem Acta B 128 (2017)
17e21.
Z. Tahmasebi, S.S.H. Davarani, H. Ebrahimzadeh, et al., Ultra-trace determination of Cr (VI) ions in real water samples after electromembrane extraction
through novel nanostructured polyaniline reinforced hollow ﬁbers followed
by electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry, Microchem. J. 143 (2018)
212e219.
W. Alahmad, N. Tungkijanansin, T. Kaneta, et al., A colorimetric paper-based
analytical device coupled with hollow ﬁber membrane liquid phase microextraction (HF-LPME) for highly sensitive detection of hexavalent chromium
in water samples, Talanta 190 (2018) 78e84.
L. Alavi, S. Seidi, A. Jabbari, et al., Deep eutectic liquid organic salt as a new
solvent for carrier-mediated hollow ﬁber liquid phase microextraction of
lead from whole blood followed by electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry, New J. Chem. 41 (2017) 7038e7044.
S. Nojavan, T. Rahmani, S. Mansouri, Selective determination of chromium
(VI) in industrial wastewater samples by micro-electromembrane extraction
combined with electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry, water, air,
Soil Pollut 229 (2018) 89.
A. Thongsaw, R. Sananmuang, Y. Udnan, et al., Speciation of mercury in water
and freshwater ﬁsh samples using two-step hollow ﬁber liquid phase
microextraction with electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry,
Spectrochem Acta B 152 (2019) 102e108.
U. Atikarnsakul, P. Varanusupakul, W. Alahmad, Isolation of chromium (VI)
from aqueous solution by electromembrane extraction, Anal. Lett. 51 (2018)
983e997.
C. Onac, A. Kaya, I. Sener, et al., An electromembrane extraction with polymeric membrane under constant current for the recovery of Cr (VI) from
industrial water, J. Electrochem. Soc. 165 (2018) E76eE80.
A. Fashi, M.R. Yaftian, A. Zamani, Electromembrane extractionpreconcentration followed by microvolume UVeVis spectrophotometric
determination of mercury in water and ﬁsh samples, Food Chem. 221 (2017)
714e720.
M. Khajeh, M. Dahmardeh, M. Bohlooli, et al., Determination of gold in water
samples using electromembrane extraction, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol. 39
(2018) 311e315.
A. Fashi, M.R. Yaftian, A. Zamani, Electromembrane-microextraction of bismuth in pharmaceutical and human plasma samples: optimization using
response surface methodology, Microchem. J. 130 (2017) 71e78.
W.A. Khan, Y. Yamini, M. Baharfar, et al., A new microﬂuidic-chip device for
selective and simultaneous extraction of drugs with various properties, New
J. Chem. 43 (2019) 9689e9695.
n-Hidalgo, G. Lo
 pez-Pe
rez, M.J. Martín-Valero, et al., Chitosan tailorC. Roma
made membranes as biopolymeric support for electromembrane extraction,
Talanta 199 (2019) 290e295.
ndez, L. Vårdal, L. Vidal, et al., Complexation-mediated electroE. Ferna
membrane extraction of highly polar basic drugsda fundamental study with
catecholamines in urine as model system, Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 409 (2017)
4215e4223.

121

[69] H. Xu, H.-Y. Mi, M.-M. Guan, et al., Residue analysis of tetracyclines in milk by
HPLC coupled with hollow ﬁber membranes-based dynamic liquid-liquid
micro-extraction, Food Chem. 232 (2017) 198e202.
[70] F. Ghamari, A. Bahrami, Y. Yamini, et al., Hollow-ﬁber liquid-phase microextraction based on carrier-mediated transport for determination of urinary
methyl hippuric acids, Toxicol. Environ. Chem. 99 (2017) 760e771.
[71] A. Bahrami, F. Ghamari, Y. Yamini, et al., Hollow ﬁber supported liquid
membrane extraction combined with HPLC-UV for simultaneous preconcentration and determination of urinary hippuric acid and mandelic acid,
Membranes 7 (2017) 8.
[72] Y. Zhang, W. Guo, Z. Yue, et al., Rapid determination of 54 pharmaceutical
and personal care products in ﬁsh samples using microwave-assisted
extractiondhollow
ﬁberdliquid/solid
phase
microextraction,
J. Chromatogr. B 1051 (2017) 41e53.
[73] A. Fashi, F. Khanban, M.R. Yaftian, et al., The cooperative effect of reduced
graphene oxide and Triton X-114 on the electromembrane microextraction
efﬁciency of Pramipexole as a model analyte in urine samples, Talanta 162
(2017) 210e217.
[74] M.S. Restan, H. Jensen, X. Shen, et al., Comprehensive study of buffer systems
and local pH effects in electromembrane extraction, Anal. Chim. Acta 984
(2017) 116e123.
[75] M. Karami, Y. Yamini, Y.A. Asl, et al., On-chip pulsed electromembrane
extraction as a new concept for analysis of biological ﬂuids in a small device,
J. Chromatogr. A 1527 (2017) 1e9.
[76] H. Tabani, S. Asadi, S. Nojavan, et al., Introduction of agarose gel as a green
membrane in electromembrane extraction: an efﬁcient procedure for the
extraction of basic drugs with a wide range of polarities, J. Chromatogr. A
1497 (2017) 47e55.
[77] C. Rom
an-Hidalgo, M.J. Martín-Valero, R. Fern
andez-Torres, et al., New
nanostructured support for carrier-mediated electromembrane extraction of
high polar compounds, Talanta 162 (2017) 32e37.
[78] M. Baharfar, Y. Yamini, S. Seidi, et al., Quantitative analysis of clonidine and
ephedrine by a microﬂuidic system: on-chip electromembrane extraction
followed by high performance liquid chromatography, J. Chromatogr. B 1068
(2017) 313e321.
[79] N.S.M. Hanapi, M.M. Sanagi, A.K. Ismail, et al., Ionic liquid-impregnated
agarose ﬁlm two-phase micro-electrodriven membrane extraction (IL-AFm-EME) for the analysis of antidepressants in water samples, J. Chromatogr. B
1046 (2017) 73e80.
[80] A. Atarodi, M. Chamsaz, A.Z. Moghaddam, et al., Introduction of fullerene as a
new carrier in electromembrane extraction for the determination of
ibuprofen and sodium diclofenac as model acidic drugs in real urine samples,
Chromatographia 80 (2017) 881e890.
[81] N.S. Mohamad Hanapi, M.M. Sanagi, A.K. Ismail, et al., Rapid determination of
non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs in aquatic matrices by two-phase
micro-electrodriven membrane extraction combined with liquid chromatography, J. Chromatogr. Sci. 56 (2017) 166e176.
[82] S. Nojavan, M. Sirani, S. Asadi, Investigation of the continuous ﬂow of the
sample solution on the performance of electromembrane extraction: comparison with conventional procedure, J. Sep. Sci. 40 (2017) 3889e3897.
~ iz-Valencia, J.M. Jurado, et al., Hollow ﬁber liquid
[83] V. Salvatierra-stamp, R. Mun
phase microextraction combined with liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry for the analysis of emerging contaminants in water samples,
Microchem. J. 140 (2018) 87e95.
[84] C. Worawit, D.J. Cocovi-Solberg, P. Varanusupakul, et al., In-line carbon
nanoﬁber reinforced hollow ﬁber-mediated liquid phase microextraction
using a 3D printed extraction platform as a front end to liquid chromatography for automatic sample preparation and analysis: a proof of concept
study, Talanta 185 (2018) 611e619.
[85] M. Rajabi, N. Ghassab, M. Hemmati, et al., Highly effective and safe intermediate based on deep eutectic medium for carrier less-three phase hollow
ﬁber microextraction of antiarrhythmic agents in complex matrices,
J. Chromatogr. B 1104 (2019) 196e204.
[86] R.-H. Cristina, M.-V.M. Jesús, F.-T. Rut, et al., Use of polymer inclusion
membranes (PIMs) as support for electromembrane extraction of nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and highly polar acidic drugs, Talanta
179 (2018) 601e607.
[87] S. Asadi, H. Tabani, S. Nojavan, Application of polyacrylamide gel as a new
membrane in electromembrane extraction for the quantiﬁcation of basic
drugs in breast milk and wastewater samples, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 151
(2018) 178e185.
[88] S. Yaripour, A. Mohammadi, I. Esfanjani, et al., Quantitation of zolpidem in
biological ﬂuids by electro-driven microextraction combined with HPLC-UV
analysis, EXCLI journal 17 (2018) 349.
[89] J.M. Kim, S.W. Myung, Determination of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs in urine by HPLCeUV/vis analysis coupled with electromembrane
extraction, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 39 (2018) 335e340.
[90] S. Yaripour, M. Zaheri, A. Mohammadi, An electromembrane extractioneHPLC-UV analysis for the determination of valproic acid in human
plasma, J. Chin. Chem. Soc. 65 (2018) 989e994.
[91] H.R. Moazami, S.S.H. Davarani, M. Abrari, et al., Electromembrane extraction
using a round-headed platinum wire as the inner electrode: a simple and
practical way to enhance the performance of extraction, Chromatographia 81
(2018) 1023e1033.
[92] C. Huang, X. Shen, A. Gjelstad, et al., Investigation of alternative supported
W.A. Khan et al. / Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2020) 109e122
liquid membranes in electromembrane extraction of basic drugs from human plasma, J. Membr. Sci. 548 (2018) 176e183.
M.a. Ramos Payan, E. Santigosa, R. Fernandez Torres, et al., A new microchip
design. A versatile combination of electromembrane extraction and liquidphase microextraction in a single chip device, Anal. Chem. 90 (2018)
10417e10424.
M.R. Saadat, M. Qomi, S. Emadzadeh, et al., Microextraction and determination of diclofenac in biological samples using hollow ﬁber liquid phase
microextraction technique coupled with HPLC-UV, J Appli Chemi Resear 12
(2018) 16e25.
A. Nazaripour, Y. Yamini, H. Bagheri, Extraction and determination of trace
amounts of three anticancer pharmaceuticals in urine by three-phase hollow
ﬁber liquid-phase microextraction based on two immiscible organic solvents
followed by high-performance liquid chromatography, J. Sep. Sci. 41 (2018)
3113e3120.
R.P. Horta, B. do Amaral, P.G. Peralta-Zamora, et al., Evaluation of a hollowﬁber liquid-phase microextraction technique for the simultaneous determination of PPI drugs in human plasma by LC-DAD, J. Chromatogr. Sci. 56
(2018) 564e573.
N.N. Al-Hashimi, A.I. Awwad, A.N. Al-Hashimi, et al., Functionalized Multi
walled carbon nanotubes-reinforced hollow ﬁber solid/liquid phase microextraction and HPLC-DAD for determination of phenazopyridine in urine,
Curr. Pharmaceut. Anal. 15 (2019) 447e455.
L. Yang, Y. Shi, J. Li, et al., In situ derivatization and hollow-ﬁber liquid-phase
microextraction to determine sulfonamides in water using UHPLC with
ﬂuorescence detection, J. Sep. Sci. 41 (2018) 1651e1662.

M. Díaz-Alvarez,
A. Martín-Esteban, Hollow ﬁber membrane-protected
molecularly imprinted microspheres for micro solid-phase extraction and
́
́
clean-up of thiabendazole
in citrus samples,
J. Chromatogr. A 1531 (2018)
39e45.
S.S. Hosseiny Davarani, A. Pourahadi, P. Ghasemzadeh, Quantiﬁcation of
controlled release leuprolide and triptorelin in rabbit plasma using electromembrane extraction coupled with HPLCeUV, Electrophoresis 40 (2019)
1074e1081.
n, M. Callejon-Mochon, et al., Effect of
N. Aranda-Merino, M. Ramos-Paya
counter-ions on electromembrane extraction of non-steroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs, J. Electroanal. Chem. 840 (2019) 255e262.
S.S. Nasrollahi, S.S.H. Davarani, H.R. Moazami, Impedometric investigation of
salt effects on electromembrane extraction: practical hints for pH adjustment, Electrochim. Acta 296 (2019) 355e363.
A. Rahimi, S. Nojavan, Electromembrane extraction of verapamil and riluzole
from urine and wastewater samples using a mixture of organic solvents as a
supported liquid membrane: study on electric current variations, J. Sep. Sci.
42 (2019) 566e573.
R. Zhu, Y. Dong, X. Cai, et al., Determination of barbiturates in biological
specimens by Flat membrane-based liquid-phase microextraction and liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry, Molecules 24 (2019) 1494.
S. Seidi, M.H. Ranjbar, M. Baharfar, et al., A promising design of microﬂuidic
electromembrane extraction coupled with sensitive colorimetric detection
for colorless compounds based on quantum dots ﬂuorescence, Talanta 194
(2019) 298e307.
F. Zarghampour, Y. Yamini, M. Baharfar, et al., Simultaneous extraction of
acidic and basic drugs via on-chip electromembrane extraction using a
single-compartment microﬂuidic device, Analyst 144 (2019) 1159e1166.
N.N. AL-Hashimi, R.O. Shahin, A.N. AL-Hashimi, et al., Cetyl-alcohol-reinforced hollow ﬁber solid/liquid-phase microextraction and HPLCeDAD
analysis of ezetimibe and simvastatin in human plasma and urine, Biomed.
Chromatogr. 33 (2019), e4410.
F. Barahona, B. Albero, J.L. Tadeo, et al., Molecularly imprinted polymerhollow ﬁber microextraction of hydrophilic ﬂuoroquinolone antibiotics in
environmental waters and urine samples, J. Chromatogr. A 1587 (2019)
42e49.
S. Seidi, L. Alavi, A. Jabbari, et al., Three-phase carrier-mediated hollow ﬁber
microextraction based on deep eutectic solvent followed by HPLCeUV for
determination of raloxifene and ethinylestradiol in pharmaceutical wastewater treatment plants, J. Iran. Chem. Soc. 16 (2019) 1007e1018.
M. Shamsayei, Y. Yamini, H. Asiabi, et al., Electromembrane surrounded
solid-phase microextraction using a stainless-steel wire coated with a
nanocomposite composed of polypyrrole and manganese dioxide, Microchim Acta 184 (2017) 2697e2705.
H. Tabani, A. Shokri, S. Tizro, et al., Evaluation of dispersive liquideliquid
microextraction
by
coupling
with
green-based
agarose
gelelectromembrane extraction: an efﬁcient method to the tandem extraction
of basic drugs from biological ﬂuids, Talanta 199 (2019) 329e335.
S. Nojavan, H. Shaghaghi, T. Rahmani, et al., Combination of electromembrane extraction and electro-assisted liquid-liquid microextraction: a
tandem sample preparation method, J. Chromatogr. A 1563 (2018) 20e27.
k, K.F. Seip, S. Pedersen-Bjergaard, et al., Semi-automated set-up for
M. Dvora
exhaustive micro-electromembrane extractions of basic drugs from

biological ﬂuids, Anal. Chim. Acta 1005 (2018) 34e42.
n
 , In-line coupling of supported liquid membrane
[114] P. Pant
u
ckov
a, P. Kuba
extraction to capillary electrophoresis for simultaneous analysis of basic and
acidic drugs in urine, J. Chromatogr. A 1519 (2017) 137e144.
[115] M. Forough, K. Farhadi, A. Eyshi, et al., Rapid ionic liquid-supported nanohybrid composite reinforced hollow-ﬁber electromembrane extraction followed by ﬁeld-ampliﬁed sample injection-capillary electrophoresis: an
effective approach for extraction and quantiﬁcation of Imatinib mesylate in
human plasma, J. Chromatogr. A 1516 (2017) 21e34.
[116] A. Slampova, P. Kuban, Direct analysis of free aqueous and organic operational solutions as a tool for understanding fundamental principles of electromembrane extraction, Anal. Chem. 89 (2017) 12960e12967.
[117] N. Drouin, J.-F.o. Mandscheff, S. Rudaz, et al., Development of a new
extraction device based on parallel-electromembrane extraction, Anal.
Chem. 89 (2017) 6346e6350.
[118] A.R. Fakhari, S. Asadi, H.M. Kosalar, et al., Metaleorganic framework
enhanced electromembrane extractionea conceptual study using basic
drugs as model substances, Ana Methods 9 (2017) 5646e5652.
[119] Z. Aladaghlo, A.R. Fakhari, K.S. Hasheminasab, Carrier assisted electromembrane extraction based on nonionic lipophilic surfactants for the
determination of basic drugs in urine samples, Ana Methods 9 (2017)
5659e5667.
[120] M. Forough, K. Farhadi, R. Molaei, et al., Capillary electrophoresis with online
stacking in combination with AgNPs@ MCM-41 reinforced hollow ﬁber
solid-liquid phase microextraction for quantitative analysis of Capecitabine
and its main metabolite 5-Fluorouracil in plasma samples isolated from
cancer patients, J. Chromatogr. B 1040 (2017) 22e37.
[121] A.R. Fakhari, H. Mohammadi Kosalar, S. Asadi, et al., Surfactant-assisted
electromembrane extraction combined with cyclodextrin-modiﬁed capillary
electrophoresis for the separation and quantiﬁcation of Tranylcypromine
enantiomers in biological samples, J. Sep. Sci. 41 (2018) 475e482.
 , Two-phase micro-electromembrane extraction across
[122] A. Slampov
a
free liquid membrane for determination of acidic drugs in complex samples,
Anal. Chim. Acta 1048 (2019) 58e65.
k, P. Kub
 , The effect of membrane thickness on sup[123] L. Rysav
a, M. Dvora
an
̌
́ membrane
́̌
ported liquid
extractions in-line coupled to capillary electrophoresis for analyses of complex samples, J. Chromatogr. A 1596 (2019)
226e232.
[124] C. Roman-Hidalgo, E. Santigosa-Murillo, M. Ramos-Pay
an, et al., On-chip
electromembrane extraction of acidic drugs, Electrophoresis (2019).
[125] Z. Moﬁdi, P. Norouzi, S. Seidi, et al., Efﬁcient design for in situ determination
of amlodipine in whole blood samples using fast Fourier transform stripping
square wave voltammetry after preconcentration by electromembrane
extraction, New J. Chem. 41 (2017) 13567e13575.
[126] Z. Moﬁdi, P. Norouzi, S. Seidi, et al., Determination of diclofenac using
electromembrane extraction coupled with stripping FFT continuous cyclic
voltammetry, Anal. Chim. Acta 972 (2017) 38e45.
[127] B. Hatamluyi, Z. Es’ haghi, A layer-by-layer sensing architecture based on
dendrimer and ionic liquid supported reduced graphene oxide for simultaneous hollow-ﬁber solid phase microextraction and electrochemical determination of anti-cancer drug imatinib in biological samples, J. Electroanal.
Chem. 801 (2017) 439e449.
[128] Z. Moﬁdi, P. Norouzi, B. Larijani, et al., Simultaneous determination and
extraction of ultra-trace amounts of estradiol valerate from whole blood
using FFT square wave voltammetry and low-voltage electrically enhanced
microextraction techniques, J. Electroanal. Chem. 813 (2018) 83e91.
[129] Z. Tahmasebi, S.S.H. Davarani, A.A. Asgharinezhad, Highly efﬁcient electrochemical determination of propylthiouracil in urine samples after selective
electromembrane extraction by copper nanoparticles-decorated hollow ﬁbers, Biosens. Bioelectron. 114 (2018) 66e71.
[130] Z. Moﬁdi, C. Esmaeili, P. Norouzi, et al., Ultra-trace determination of imipramine using a Sr (VO3) 2 doped phytic acid carbon paste electrode after
preconcentration by electromembrane extraction coupled with FFT square
wave voltammetry, J. Electrochem. Soc. 165 (2018) H205eH212.
[131] V. Hrdli
cka, T. Navr
atil, J. Barek, Application of hollow ﬁbre based microextraction for voltammetric determination of vanillylmandelic acid in human urine, J. Electroanal. Chem. 835 (2019) 130e136.
[132] A. Oedit, R. Ramautar, T. Hankemeier, et al., Electroextraction and electromembrane extraction: advances in hyphenation to analytical techniques,
Electrophoresis 37 (2016) 1170e1186.
[133] A. Odobasic, Determination and Speciation of Trace Heavy Metals in Natural
Water by DPASV, ISBN2012.
[134] Z. Es’haghi, A. Nezhadali, H.A. Hosseini, et al., Pre-concentration and determination of zinc in water samples by ligand assisted pseudo stirbar hollow
ﬁber solid/liquid phase microextraction, Arab J Chem 10 (2017)
S3840eS3847.
n-Jaimez, M. Joya, J. Barba-Ortega, Anodic stripping voltammetryeASV
[135] J. Baro
for determination of heavy metals, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. (2013), 012023. IOP
Publishing.

end
