editorial

Downloaded via pritesh pawar on September 2, 2020 at 04:05:02 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

Molecular Pharmaceutics, a Vision for the Future
The biomedical and pharmaceutical community is buzzing
with excitement about the potential novel therapies resulting
from the genomic revolution, bioinformatics, stem cell
research, cloning, chemical biology, molecular and cell
biology, and the basic and clinical implications of pharmacogenomics and pharmacogenetics. If the promises and
expectations hold, the researchers in the pharmaceutical field
will have, in the foreseeable future, more therapeutic targets
than we could have possibly imagined just 10 years ago,
and have multiple redundant strategies for identifying and
developing drug candidates. The nature of therapeutic agents
and delivery strategies that will emerge from all these
enterprises will probably keep changing and is likely to be
different from what we have seen in the past. In many cases,
we will undoubtedly have good ideas regarding their pharmacologic mechanisms upon inception as well as specific
locations of action and their therapeutic concentrations. These
changes, often viewed as “revolutionary” and labeled as such,
certainly give us high hopes for the future. Would they,
however, necessarily translate into more and better drug
products and therapeutic modalities? There is one thing that
is clearly changing: these developments pose a tremendous
challenge to “pharmaceutics” or “drug delivery” and at the
same time provide accompanying opportunities.
A majority of researchers in modern biomedical research,
and in cell and molecular biology in particular, often focus
their thinking and efforts primarily on discoveries of so-called
“basic” mechanisms, while their share of active contributions
to drug development beyond that point tends to abate. To
many, when certain therapeutic molecules exhibit good
specific activities at relatively low concentrations in a test
tube or a cell culture system, they magically become drugs
through a long yet mysterious process until they materialize
in the clinical setting. It is not entirely clear where this
attitude originates, but we still have the inclination, especially
in the academic and basic science community, not to soil
our pure scientific hands with application-oriented pharmaceutical drug product development. This, I tend to believe,
is primarily due to the misconception about the science of
pharmaceutics. Perhaps the “black box” of the drug product
development process, which certainly includes pharmaceutics, has been viewed until relatively recently as being too

10.1021/mp0400041 CCC: $27.50 © 2004 American Chemical Society
Published on Web 03/26/2004

much like engineering in nature and requiring little mechanism-based science.
With the first two issues of Molecular Pharmaceutics, one
cannot help but appreciate the salient: pharmaceutics or
pharmaceutical sciences, the discipline that focuses on
transforming the “drug” to a clinically viable therapeutic
“drug product”, is indeed multidisciplinary and will become
increasingly so. Even after refinement by the addition of the
descriptive term molecular to the name, the range of research
articles already seen in this journal derive from a multitude
of scientific disciplines. With the molecular and mechanistic
emphasis, drug delivery and pharmaceutics have been
changing conceptually from a rather descriptive science into
a logical and mechanism-based science that demands a
molecular explanation of how the process works. The
pressure is now on the pharmaceutical scientists, during the
course of this evolution and revolution, to incorporate into
pharmaceutical research the rapidly expanding body of
knowledge in the molecular and cellular fields, rather than
to focus exclusively in the traditional sense on formulating
a delivery strategy for a given drug candidate even with the
sacrifice of the molecular understanding of the design. This
will undoubtedly force us into more intimate and successful
collaboration with a wide range of scientific fields, which
inevitably requires educating scientists from all relevant
disciplines about the ever-evolving needs and concepts of
molecular pharmaceutics. Like other fields in science,
pharmaceutical sciences is truly multidisciplinary, and molecular pharmaceutics will be less apt to evolve and progress
without collaborative efforts from a wide range of scientific
disciplines.
The editorial office and board of Molecular Pharmaceutics
are pleased with the recognition of the enormous potential
of the role provided by this particular forum in meeting the
needs of the molecular revolution in pharmaceutics. It is safe
to say that we can be excited and optimistic about the future
of molecular pharmaceutics.
Kyung-Dall Lee
Associate Editor
MP0400041

VOL. 1, NO. 3, 173 MOLECULAR PHARMACEUTICS

173

