abstract

Article history:

The shapes of particles and their distribution in tablets, controlled by pretreatment and

Received 29 July 2018

tableting process, determine the pharmaceutical performance of excipient like lubricant.

Revised 18 November 2018

This study aims to provide deeper insights to the relationship of the morphology and spa-

Accepted 10 January 2019

tial distribution of stearic acid (SA) with the lubrication efficiency, as well as the resulting

Available online 1 March 2019

tablet property. Unmodified SA particles as flat sheet-like particles were firstly reprocessed
by emulsification in hot water to obtain the reprocessed SA particles with spherical mor-

keywords

Stearic acid Morphology Spatial distribution SR-μCTed Glipizide tablets


Introduction

Excipients play an important role in the properties and performance of the final formulation of solid dosage forms, such
as texture, stability, release, and bioavailability [1–3]. Among
all the excipients, lubricant can significantly change the dynamics of blending, compression and the mechanical properties of compacts. The physical properties of lubricant such as
magnesium stearate, stearic acid (SA) and talc can affect their
performance in tablet and capsule formulations [4]. For pharmaceutical operations such as blending, roller compaction,
tablet manufacturing and capsule filling, lubricants improve
the flowability of blends, facilitate unit operations and powder processing properties by reducing the inter-particle friction [5,6]. In terms of the effect of lubricant particle properties, SA can improve density, stickiness, and flowability of
powdered excipient-drug mixtures. SA with a large surface
area and small particle size has the best lubrication efficiency,
since the increase of surface area can provide more surface
coverage [4,7]. Ingredient spatial distribution is closely related
to the quality attribute of tablet [8,9]. To study the influence
of SA on the physical properties of tablets, it should be verified that lubricant particles are homogeneously mixed with
the rest constituents of the formulation [10]. Systematic studies of three-dimensional (3D) material distribution in solid
dosage forms are restricted with limited techniques. Most of
the existing researches using near-infrared chemical imaging, Raman imaging or Terahertz time-domain reflection spectroscopy have been confined to research the material distribution on the surface of a sample or the cross-sectional specimen [11,12]. Recently, innovative research of synchrotron radiation X-ray micro-computed tomography (SR-μCT) in conjunction with liquid chromatography enables materials spatial distribution visualization in tablets [13].
SR-μCT is an advanced tomographic imaging technology
which employs synchrotron radiation, the most intense artificial source of X-ray, as an illuminating source to obtain
the internal and micro-structural details of a solid sample at
micrometer scale. Methods combining the obtained X-ray tomography, image processing, and 3D reconstruction have been
devised and evaluated to study systematically the researched
objects. As SR-μCT can reveal the morphology and internal 3D
structure, and give a better understanding of the properties of
different materials, it has been used to extensively study geological specimens [14,15], bio-materials [16], tablets [17,18] and
granules [19]. In contrast to conventional techniques, SR-μCT
provides a non-invasive scan, quantitative visualization and
evaluation of the 3D structures with high-speed imaging, intensive strength and high spatial resolution. Within pharmaceutical material science and drug delivery system research,
SR-μCT has been applied to analyze the complex structural
systems of HPMC-based extended release tablets and gain improved mechanistic knowledge on drug release [20]. For excipients in common use like microcrystalline cellulose, the high
spatial resolution of SR-μCT makes it possible to evaluate individual structure of particles, processing behavior and to classify microcrystalline celluloses of the same grade from different manufacturers [21].

Main

This study details multi-dimensional comparative research of SA particles in the reference listed drug (RLD) of glipizide tablets (Glucotrol® , 5 mg), glipizide tablets prepared using unmodified SA (GUT) and reprocessed SA (GRT). Considering the potential influence of morphology and size of SA particles on spatial distribution and tablet properties, efforts have
been made to reprocess the common SA as flat sheet-like particles into SA particles with regular spherical morphology. SA
particles, before and after being compressed into tablets, have
been visualized and quantified in multi-dimension to verify
the effect of SA morphology on tablet quality.

Glipizide tablet (Glucotrol® , 5 mg), manufactured by Pfizer U.S.
Pharmaceuticals Group (New York, USA), was the reference
listed drug (RLD). Stearic acid (≥99.5%, SA) and silicon dioxide
(≥99.0%) were purchased from Huzhou Prospect Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Zhejiang, China). Lactose (≥99.5%), microcrystalline cellulose (≥99.0%, MCC) and starch (≥99.5%) were produced by Shanghai Yunhong Pharmaceutical Excipients Co.,
Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Glipizide (≥99.5%) and sodium lauryl
sulfate (≥99.0%, SLS) were supplied by Sinopharm Chemical
Reagent Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China.). Pure water was produced
by water purification system (Academic, Millipore, USA).



About 300 mg SLS was weighed and dissolved under ultrasonic agitation for 10 min in 150 ml pure water to get a solution (0.2%, w/v). Then, 15 g SA was added into the SLS solution.
The system was moved directly to a magnetic heated stirrer
(ETS-D5, IKA, Germany) at a rotor speed of 1000 rpm and controlled at 80 °C for half an hour (The melting point of SA is
68.8 °C). After that, the obtained emulsion of liquid SA and water was transferred to a vertical overhead stirrer (10 M/M-D15,
IKA, Germany) to stir at 1000 rpm. At the same time, pure water (600 ml at 0 °C) was rapidly poured into the system which
resulted in a sudden fall in temperature below the melting
point of SA. The stir was prolonged further for 40 min. The
solid particles were collected by filtration with 0.45 μm millipore filter and washed with 50 ml pure water. The obtained SA
particles were dried in a desiccator for 24 h and sieved through
100 mesh size to obtain reprocessed SA particles.


Unmodified SA particles were firstly sieved through 100 mesh
size and the obtained ones were used for the determination
of flowability and tableting. The angle of repose of unmodified
SA particles and reprocessed SA particles were measured using a powder tester (PT-S, Hosokawa Micron, Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China). For each kind of SA particles, the measurement of
angle of repose was analyzed in triplicate.


Preparation of glipizide tablets and determination of
mass and breaking force
From the label of Glucotrol® tablet published on the Food and
Drug Administration, inert ingredients used were SA, silicon
dioxide, lactose, MCC and starch. Unmodified SA particles or
reprocessed SA particles (1.5%, w/w) were well blended with
glipizide and other excipients specified in the prescription by a
bench-top mixer (VH-2, Tianhe Machinery, Co., Ltd., Shanghai,
China). Tablet compaction experiments were conducted on a
bench-scale rotary tablet presser (ZPS8, Tianjiu Machinery factory, Shanghai, China) equipped with 8.0 mm diameter and
shallow concave punches, using compression force as 5 kN.
Force-measuring equipment was connected to strain gauges
(RFS150E, Huqin Equipement, Shanghai, China) which allowed
the pressure forces on the upper and under punches to be followed. The turret speed was set as 8 rpm. The filling depth of
material was 5.60 mm. Mixed blend was directly compressed
into ∼198 mg tablets with thickness of 3.80 ± 0.18 mm and diameter of 7.62 mm. GUT and GRT were produced, at the same
time, die wall force and ejecting force of each tablet were also
recorded for further analysis.
The determination of mass was performed by weighing
each kind of tablet with an analytical balance (CPA225D, Sartorius, Germany). According to the hardness test approved
by USP (1217), the breaking force of RLD, GUT and GRT were
measured with a hardness tester (YPD-200C, Hengqin Instrument Equipment Co., Ltd. Shanghai, China) by compressing
the tablets between two slowly moving jaws until they were
crushed. The mass and breaking force of each kind of glizipide
tablet were measured from 6-tablet samples.

2.5.

Isolation of SA particles in tablets

SA (specific gravity (s.g.): 0.86 at 20 °C) is practically insoluble
in water and less dense than water. Lactose and starch are water soluble, and glipizide (s.g.: 1.29), silicon dioxide (s.g.: 2.20)
and MCC (s.g.: 1.27–1.60) used in tablet are denser than water (all the data come from PubChem). Hence, according to the
difference of solubility and density, SA particles can be separated from the tablet in water system, keeping their morphology and particle size unchanged.
SA particles in RLD, GUT and GRT were isolated from active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) and other excipients by
physical method without changing their morphology. For each
kind of glipizide tablet, three tablets were dipped into 10 ml
ice cold water (0 °C). The tablets swelled slowly and disintegrated in 10 min. Meanwhile, ingredients were found floating
up in clusters. The suspension was allowed to set for another
10 min at low temperature (0–10 °C) so that SA particles could
float in water completely. The buoyant layer, about one-third
of the suspension, was collected into a beaker. Then cold water (0 °C) was added to the beaker up to 20 ml. After setting for
10 min, some ingredients were found at the bottom and extremely fine particles of SA floated on the water surface. The
buoyant layer was collected again and the same procedures
were repeated three times to isolate pure SA particles. The finally collected buoyant layer was transferred to an evaporating dish and placed in a desiccator at 20 °C till fully dried.

2.6.

Conventional morphological characterization

Morphological characterization of SA particles was carried out
by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S-4800, Hitachi). To obtain SEM photographs, specimens were evenly immobilized
on a metal stub with double-sided adhesive tape and coated
with a thin layer of gold before being observed under magnification.

2.7.

Tablet structure measurement by SR-μCT

SR-μCT tomographic images of three kinds of glipizide tablets
were acquired with the BL13W1 beam line at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF). Glipizide tablets were fixed
on the sample stage with a double-sided adhesive tape to prevent any unexpected movements during scans. Axis adjustment of the sample stage was also taken to make sure that
there was no deviation in the horizontal direction during sample rotation. RLD, GUT and GRT were measured in different SRμCT scans. According to the preliminary experiments and references, the imaging parameters have been optimized [22,23].
The tablets were scanned with a photon energy of 18.0 keV. After penetration through the sample, the X-rays were converted
into visible light by a YAG: Ce scintillator (200 μm thickness).
Projections were magnified by diffraction-limited microscope
optics (1.25 × magnification) and digitized in high-resolution
with an effective pixel size of 5.2 μm (ORCA Flash 4.0 Scientific CMOS, Hamamatsu K.K., Shizuoka Pref., Japan, physical
pixel size: 6.5 μm). The exposure time affects the X-ray photon number reaching the detector. When the exposure time
increases, the flux used to capture a projection will be raised,
as well as the analyzing time. In our study, the exposure time
was 1 s. The distance between sample to detector (DSD) is also
a key factor in-line phase contrast SR-μCT, and especially useful for the imaging of materials with low-Z elements and lowdensity. In order to enhance the contrast to show a small difference in density, the DSD was also adjusted appropriately
and was set at 12 cm. For each acquisition, 900 projection images were captured with an angular step size of 0.2° for 180°.
Flat-field images (i.e., X-ray illumination on the beam path
without the sample) and dark-field images (i.e., X-ray illumination off) were also collected during each acquisition procedure, so as to correct the electronic noise and variations in the
X-ray source brightness. Imaging acquisition time for each CT
scan was 30 min.

2.8.

3D structure reconstruction

In order to enhance the quality of reconstructed slices,
propagation-based phase-contrast extraction was successfully conducted as described previously in our report [24].
Software PITRE (Phase-sensitive X-ray Image processing and
Tomography REconstruction), which extracts information of
diffraction enhanced imaging, and PITRE BM (PITRE Batch
Manager), which executes a series of tasks that created via
PITRE [25], were applied to allow parallel-beam tomography
reconstruction for conventional absorption CT information.
Depending on the magnitude of X-ray absorption for different materials of the glipizide tablet, gray level images were



Fig. 1 – SEM micrographs of unmodified SA (A)–(C) and reprocessed SA (D)–(F) under different magnifications reveal that the
morphology and size of reprocessed SA are more regular than those of unmodified SA. SEM images of SA particles isolated
from RLD (G), GUT (H) and GRT (I) show that the morphologies of these three kinds of SA particles are similar.

formed and the gray levels of various materials were determined, such that the SA particles of interest could be extracted
from the 3D models by segmentation in imaging processing.
Threshold was defined and certain gray value corresponding
to the SA particles was determined (Fig. 3), so that SA particles
can be separated from the solid matrix. The 3D rendered data
were analyzed by using the commercially available softwareAmira (version 6.01, FEI, USA) and Image Pro Analyzer 3D (version 7.0, Media Cybernetics, Inc., Bethesda, MD, USA), to obtain structural and morphological information of SA particles
in tablets. In line with the differences of materials in densities
and molecular properties (Table S1), the precise profile parameters were calculated.

3.

Results and discussion

3.1.

Two dimensional morphology analysis of SA particles

The morphology and surface characteristics of unmodified
SA particles and reprocessed SA particles analyzed by SEM
are presented in Fig. 1. Notably, unmodified SA particles

(Fig. 1A–C) with flat sheet-like morphology are conspicuously
varied in size, while reprocessed SA particles (Fig. 1D–F) are
topographically more spherical and relatively more uniform
in size. At individual particle level, some particles of unmodified SA are larger in size with a smooth surface, while some
of reprocessed SA particles possess obscure invagination. In
short, the morphology and size of reprocessed SA particles
are more regular than those of unmodified SA particles. The
comparatively big differences existing in unmodified and reprocessed SA particles make them distinguishable from each
other.
SEM images of SA particles isolated from RLD (Fig. 1G), GUT
(Fig. 1H) and GRT (Fig. 1I) display similar appearance. Dramatic
changes can be seen in the morphology of unmodified SA in
GUT from an irregular flat shape to much rounder morphology, while no evident morphology changes are observed from
reprocessed SA. Due to the low melting point of SA (68.8 °C),
morphological changes of SA particles could be due to the heat
production process of material mixing or tableting. The more
uniform of the SA particles morphology, the more uniform
force applied to SA, and the smaller frictional force among materials.

64

Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–68

Fig. 2 – Reconstruction and phase contrast extraction process include shadow projection after flat-field and dark-field
corrections (A), projection after phase retrieval (B), reconstructed slice (C), truncated slice (D), 3D image of a tablet (E) and SA
particles in the tablet (F).

SA particles were isolated according to the density and water solubility of each substance that formed the tablet, which
were further confirmed by thermal platform microscope in
our work and more relevant researches will be carried out in
later studies.

3.2.

Glipizide tablets measured by SR-μCT

By SR-μCT scan, original data of hundreds of shadow projections were firstly gotten (Fig. 2A) but revealed no useful information. Phase retrieval was performed with projection images using the software PITRE for propagation-based phase
contrast extraction (Fig. 2B). Then, reconstructed 2D slices of
the specimen were obtained and the value of α was calibrated
from 32 bit to 8 bit (gray value 0–255) (Fig. 2C and 2D). The CT
image values (gray-levels) provide information on the material
X-ray attenuation coefficient at each point in the image. As the
reconstructed 2D slice (Fig. 3A) of the RLD radial middle layer
show, the lighter areas of the slice have a relatively high gray
value and the darker areas with a low gray value. SA particles
have the lowest density among all the ingredients in glipizide
tablet, which reflects weaker X-ray absorption and the lowest
gray value. Thus, it is certained that the small dark spots in the
slice are the SA particles. Fig. 3B is the partial magnification
of the slice, which shows how the threshold of SA particles
defined. As shown in the line profile (Fig. 3C) of the selected
SA particle, the steepest part of the line was chosen and the
middle value of its vertical coordinate was determined as the
threshold. In order to obtain as exact gray value of SA particles as possible, the dark spots in different slices of different
glipizide tablets were calculated. As the threshold was defined

and certain gray value corresponds to the SA particles was determined, SA particles can be separated from the solid matrix
(Fig. 2F), which realistically reconstructs the morphology and
position of SA particles in tablets.
Then, all the 2D slices were processed by Amira to get the
full reconstructed 3D images of tablets (Fig. 2E). The 3D morphological information of hundreds even thousands of SA particles can be obtained and 3D quantitative parameters are calculated. Besides, the uniformity of SA particles spatial distribution in tablets is monitored via high-resolution imaging using SR-μCT.
The use of non-destructive X-ray micro-tomography allows
one to characterize the density distribution of an individual
tablet and then further characterize the particles within the
tablet. The optimized 3D models provide full details of surface
morphology and distribution of SA particles in the tablet. 3D
images of SA particles existed in tablets are presented from
two different perspectives (Fig. 4A, C and E). Partial magnifications of SA particles are also displayed (Fig. 4B, D and F)
and each particle is colored randomly by Image Pro Analyzer
3D. The mapping spatial distribution of SA particles from 3D
overall view shows that SA particles in RLD (Fig. 4(A) and (B))
and in GRT (Fig. 4E and F) are uniformly distributed. In some
parts of GUT (Fig. 4C and D), there are SA clusters and some
zones are without SA particles, reflecting that spatial distribution of SA particles is relatively heterogeneous in GUT. This
phenomenon suggests that the inter-particle friction varied
greater among different parts in GUT when compared with
RLD and GRT. The size of SA particles in RLD and GRT is more
regular than in GUT. Moreover, SA particles exhibit most standard morphology in GRT, followed by in RLD and then in GUT,

65

Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–68

Fig. 3 – 2D original slice of the radial middle layer of the glipizide tablet (A), partial magnification of the slice containing the
selected SA particle (B) and the line profile of the selected SA particle (C).

Table 1 – Comparison and analysis of 3D morphological parameters like sphericity, equivalent diameter, area of surface, volume, total area of surface of individual SA particles, as well as the number of SA particles in RLD, GUT and GRT
(mean ± SD).
Morphology parameter

Sphericity
Equivalent diameter (μm)
Area of surface (μm2 )
Volume (μm3 )
Total area of surface (μm2 )
Number of particles

Individual SA particles in tablets
RLD

GUT

GRT

0.86 ± 0.09
36.28 ± 17.84
5 786 ± 6 156
45 872 ± 73 025
4.88 × 107
8432

0.83 ± 0.09
34.60 ± 22.90
6 659 ± 12 644
63 381 ± 222 477
2.98 × 107
4479

0.86 ± 0.06
26.45 ± 11.79
3 086 ± 2 752
15 923 ± 20 389
8.60 × 107
27 875

which can be seen from partial magnifications (Fig. 4B, 4D and
4F). Apparently, the size of SA particles in GUT are less regular,
and the difference of morphological characteristics between
different particle size ranges is also large. Bigger SA particles
may also result from the agglomeration of the particles in GUT,
which most likely due to the different SA particles used. With
the powerful SR-μCT technology, physical state of SA particles
located in solid dosage form is visualized from multiple vision
perspectives with a high spatial resolution.
3D morphological parameters like sphericity, equivalent
diameter, area of surface, volume, total area of surface of SA
particles, as well as number of SA particles in the three kinds
of tablets were calculated and tabulated in Table 1. The frequency distributing graphs of sphericity and surface area of
SA particles in each kind of tablet are also shown in Fig. 5 to
visually compare the differences by mathematical statistics.
Sphericity is usually defined as a ratio of the surface area of a
sphere having the same volume with the particle to the actual
surface area of the particle [26]. The sphericity of a sphere is
“1” and any particle which is not a sphere will have sphericity less than “1” [27]. Average value of sphericity for SA particles in GRT is similar to that in RLD, while it is smaller in
GUT. Both the standard deviation of sphericity and the frequency distributing graph of the sphericity (Fig. 5A) indicate
the sphericity fluctuation of SA particles in GRT is the smallest. What’s more, the morphology of SA particles in GUT is
the most non-uniform, which is clearly presented in the frequency distributing graph of sphericity. As sphericity of parti-

cles is thought to be related to the flowability [4], SA particles
used in GRT and RLD have better lubrication efficiency than
those in GUT. In addition, the improved sphericity of SA particles in GRT is undoubtedly owing to the reprocessing.
Equivalent diameter here is the diameter of a sphere with
the same volume as the target object. The average value of
equivalent diameter for SA particles in GRT is the smallest,
while the standard deviation of equivalent diameter for SA
particles in GUT is the biggest. Meanwhile, for average value
of surface area and volume, SA particles in GRT, RLD and GUT
arise by their turns. Therefore, it is easy to conclude that
SA particles in GRT are relatively small. Because the usage
amount of SA in GUT and GRT is the same, the smaller particle
size contributes to larger number of particles. And the number of SA particles in GRT is the biggest, then in RLD, and followed by SA particles in GUT. Since the standard deviations of
size parameters especially those of SA particles in GUT are so
high, considering the average value of size parameters alone
is not enough to get accurate information. As mentioned earlier, larger surface area contributes to improved lubrication efficiency. The total surface area of SA particles in GUT is the
smallest, reflecting that SA particles with the biggest particle
size in GUT have no better lubrication efficiency than those
in the other two kinds of tablets. The frequency profiles (Fig.
5B) of surface area indicate that rather than in GUT, the frequency distribution tendency of SA particles in GRT are more
similar with in RLD. In short, from the 3D measurement using SR-μCT technology, uniformly spherical SA particles with

66

Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–68

Fig. 4 – The 3D images of SA particles in different kinds of glipizide tablets. The left column shows location of the total SA
particles in tablets and the right column shows a partial enlarged view of SA particles. (A, B), (C, D), (E, F) represent SA in
RLD, GUT and GRT, respectively. Each particle is colored randomly by the software.

Fig. 5 – Frequency distributing graphs of 3D morphological parameters of SA particles in RLD (blue), GUT (red) and GRT
(green).

a narrow size distribution can be observed in GRT, which is
closer to the results in RLD. The elaborate quantitative results
of SA particles in tablet, which cannot be obtained without the
powerful 3D visualization tool, clearly have a profound significance for pharmaceutical design.

Rather than the conventional microscopic evaluations only
revealing incomplete morphology, the 3D structural and morphological elucidation technique of SR-μCT can satisfy the research requirements with reliable and comprehensive information in drug delivery system. Furthermore, the degree of

Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 15 (2020) 60–68

fluctuation shown in standard deviations of 3D parameters is
a reflection of the regularity in morphology. It is found that
SA particles in GRT feature the best regular morphology that
show superior flowability. SA particles in GUT have the highest fluctuation range in morphology. Particularly, for surface
area and volume, standard deviations of SA particles in GUT
are much higher than those in the other two kinds of tablets.
The dramatic visualization of SR-μCT images offered a reliable
semi-quantitative overview of the SA particles distribution in
tablets. Overall, compared with SA particles in GUT, those in
GRT are more consistent with those in RLD.
As demonstrated by the excipient example presented in
this report, accurate quantitative characterizations of component in tablet are possible when appropriate techniques are
used. For SR-μCT, high spatial resolution and contrast imaging form the basis of reliable quantitative analysis. The spatial resolution in our study is 5.2 μm and SA particles below
5.23 μm3 cannot be determined. The accuracy of the quantified SR-μCT experiments also depends on the stability of X-ray
beam physical dimensions and intensity profile, the detection
response characteristics and count rate ranges.

3.3.
Flowability, compression property and breaking force
analysis
The angles of repose for unmodified SA particles and reprocessed SA particles are 52.61 ± 0.90° and 49.08 ± 1.23°, respectively. For optimized SA particles, the average value of angle
of repose is smaller, reflecting its better flowability than unmodified SA particles. What is more, the existence of the trace
amount of SLS brings no improvement in the flowability of SA
particles (data are not be provided). Average values of die wall
force of GUT and GRT are 0.41 kN and 0.47 kN, and ejecting
force are 0.23 kN and 0.17 kN, respectively. The die wall force
indicates favorable compaction properties that prevent problems such as capping during mass manufacturing of tablets
[28], the higher die wall force for GRT indicates that reprocessed SA particles are more suitable for tableting. For ejecting force, contrasted to unmodified SA particles, reprocessed
SA particles make the tablet formulation possess lower adhesive force and frictional force during ejection of GRT from
the die cavity. Tablet breaking force is a critical parameter in
pharmaceutical process quality control, and depends on factors such as compression force, particle size and inter-particle
force [29]. In our research, breaking force evolution for RLD
(70.59 ± 6.82 N), GUT (86.58 ± 7.91 N) and GRT (68.09 ± 4.24 N)
indicates that the effect of SA particles on the breaking force of
tablet is obvious. The breaking force increased with the degree
of irregularity of SA particles and GRT is much closer to RLD.
Combined with the SR-μCT analysis, it seems that more regular morphology with higher sphericity of SA particles resulted
in a less inter-particle force and decreased breaking force. It
should be noted that the gap of morphological parameters like
particle volume, surface area and total surface area between
GRT and RLD are large, but the breaking force of RLD and GRT
are overlapping. While more importantly, the order of these
morphological parameters of RLD, GRT and GUT has the same
trend as that of the breaking forces of the three kinds of tablets
considering the mean ± SD values. Some complicated mathe-

67

matical or logical relationship may exist between these morphological parameters and breaking force. After all, it has been
confirmed that the breaking force of tablets is affected by multiple factors, and the specific mathematical relationship has
not been reported so far. It is thought that the usage of different kinds of SA particles chiefly contributed to the morphological differences among SA particles in RLD, GUT and GRT
and resulted in difference in tablet breaking force, whereas
the compaction conditions may also have impact on the results that cannot be underestimated. More detailed analyses
of these impacts are beyond the scope of the present report
but deserve further investigation.

4.

Conclusion

In this study, a powerful structural method has been established for the characterization of morphology and spatial distribution of SA particles in tablet prepared with different morphologies of SA as a new way to research the material in
solid dosage forms. The improved structural consistency between reprocessed SA particles in GRT and SA particles in
RLD ensures high quality of glipizide tablets. For excipients
like SA to function according to its particle structure and spatial distributions in tablets, 3D reconstruction and quantitative structure analysis by SR-μCT significantly deepen insights
of solid dosage form design and evaluation as well as rational optimization of production process. More specifically,
the novel methodology of excipient structure consistency research opens a new way to secure high quality for both generic
and brand products of drugs in solid dosage forms.

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that there is no conflicts of interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful for the financial support from
the National Science and Technology Major Project
(2017ZX09101001-006). Thanks to the BL13W1 beamline
of the SSRF for the precious beam time and help from the
team.

Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be
found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ajps.2019.01.001.

references

[2] Shojaee S, Kaialy W, Cumming KI, Nokhodchi A.
Comparative evaluation of drug release from aged prolonged
polyethylene oxide tablet matrices: effect of excipient and
drug type. Pharm Dev Technol 2016;21(2):189–95.
[3] Villalobos JR, Villafuerte RL. Effect of carrier excipient and
processing on stability of indorenate hydrochloride/excipient
mixtures. Pharm Dev Technol 2001;6(4):551–61.
[4] Li JJ, Wu YM. Lubricants in pharmaceutical solid dosage
forms. Lubricants 2014;2(1):21–43.
[5] Fridrun P, Mia Y. The influence of particle size and shape on
the angle of internal friction and the flow factor of
unlubricated and lubricated powders. Int J Pharm
1996;144(2):187–94.
[6] Wang J, Wen H, Desai D. Lubrication in tablet formulations.
Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2010;75(1):1–15.
[7] Barra J, Somma R. Influence of the physicochemical
variability of magnesium stearate on its lubricant properties:
possible solutions. Drug Dev Ind Pharm 1996;22(11):1105–20.
[8] Amigo JM, Ravn C. Direct quantification and distribution
assessment of major and minor components in
pharmaceutical tablets by NIR-chemical imaging. Eur J
Pharm Sci 2009;37(2):76–82.
[9] Sando G, Dubois J. Seeing" the chemicals in pharmaceutical
tablets with NIR chemical imaging. Chim Oggi
2010;28(1):40–2.
[10] Perrault M, Bertrand F, Chaouki J. An experimental
investigation of the effect of the amount of lubricant on
tablet properties. Drug Dev Ind Pharm 2011;37(2):234–42.
[11] Wu Z, Tao O, Cheng W, Yu L, Shi X, Qiao Y. Visualizing
excipient composition and homogeneity of compound
liquorice tablets by near-infrared chemical imaging.
Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc 2012;86(86):631–6.
[12] Takeuchi I, Shimakura K, Ohtake H, Takayanagi J, Tomoda K,
Nakajima T, et al. Nondestructive analysis of structure and
components of tablet coated with film by the usage of
terahertz time-domain reflection spectroscopy. J Pharm Sci
2014;103(1):256–61.
[13] Zhang L, Wu L, Wang CF, Zhang GQ, Yu L, Li HY,
et al. Synchrotron radiation micro-computed
tomography-guided chro-matographic analysis displays the
material distribution in tablets. Anal Chem
2018;90(5):3238–44.
[14] Altman SJ, Uchida M, Tidwell VC, Boney CM, Chambers BP.
Use of X-ray absorption imaging to examine heterogeneous
diffusion in fractured crystalline rocks. J Contam Hydrol
2004;69(1–2):1–26.
[15] Tomioka S, Kozaki T, Takamatsu H, Noda N, Nisiyama S,
Kozai N, et al. Analysis of microstructural images of dry and
water-saturated compacted bentonite samples observed
with X-ray micro CT. Appl Clay Sci 2010;47(1):
65–71.
[16] Zhang MQ, Zhou L, Deng QF, Xie YY, Xiao TQ, Cao YZ,
et al. Ultra-high-resolution 3D digitalized imaging of the
cerebral angioarchitecture in rats using synchrotron
radiation. Sci Rep 2015;5:14982.

[17] Laity PR, Cameron RE. Synchrotron X-ray microtomographic
study of tablet swelling. Eur J Pharm Biopharm
2010;75(2):263–76.
[18] Li H, Yin X, Ji J, Sun L, Shao Q, York P, et al. Microstructural
investigation to the controlled release kinetics of monolith
osmotic pump tablets via synchrotron radiation X-ray
micro-tomography. Int J Pharm 2012;427(2):270–5.
[19] Crean B, Parker A, Le Roux D, Perkins M, Luk SY, Banks SR,
et al. Elucidation of the internal physical and chemical
microstructure of pharmaceutical granules using X-ray
micro-computed tomography, Raman microscopy and
infrared spectroscopy. Eur J Pharm Biopharm
2010;76(3):498–506.
[20] Yin XZ, Li HY, Guo Z, Wu L, Chen FW, Shao Q,
et al. Quantification of swelling and erosion in the controlled
release of a poorly water-soluble drug using synchrotron
X-ray computed micro-tomography. AAPS J
2013;15(4):1025–34.
[21] Fang LW, Yin XZ, Wu L, He YP, He YZ, Qin W,
et al. Classification of microcrystalline celluloses via
structures of individual particles measured by synchrotron
radiation X-raymicro-computed tomography. Int J Pharm
2017;531(2):658–67.
[22] Ren YQ, Chen C, Chen RC, Zhou GZ, Wang YD, Xiao TQ.
Optimization of image recording distances for quantitative
X-ray in-line phase contrast imaging. Opt Express
2011;19(5):4170–81.
[23] Yang S, Yin XZ, Wang CF, Li HY, He Y, Xiao TQ, et al. Release
behaviour of single pellets and internal fine 3D structural
features co-define the in vitro drug release profile. AAPS J
2014;16(4):860–71.
[24] Guo Z, Yin XZ, Liu CB, Wu L, Zhu WF, Shao Q,
et al. Microstructural investigation using synchrotron
radiation X-ray microtomography reveals taste-masking
mechanism of acetaminophen microspheres. Int J Pharm
2015;499(1–2):47–57.
[25] Chen RC, Dreossi D, Mancini L, Menk R, Rigon L, Xiao TQ.
PITRE: software for phase-sensitive X-ray image processing
and tomograph y reconstruction. J Synchrotron Radiat
2012;19(5):836–45.
[26] Barksdale RD, Kemp MA, Sheffield WJ, Hubbard JL.
Measurement of aggregate shape, surface area, and
roughness. Transportation research record1301. Washington:
National Research Council; 1991. p. 107–16.
[27] Mora CF, Kwan KH. Sphericity, shape factor, and convexity
measurement of coarse aggregate for concrete using digital
image processing. Cem Concr Res 2000;30(3):351–8.
[28] Kasa P, Bajdik J, Zsignond Z, Pintye-Hodi K. Study of the
compaction behaviour and compressibility of binary
mixtures of some pharmaceutical excipients during direct
compression. Chem Eng Process 2009;48(4):859–63.
[29] Javaheri H, Carter P, Elkordy AA. Wet granulation to
overcome liquisolid technique issues of poor flowability and
compactibility: a study to enhance glibenclamide
dissolution. J Pharm Drug Dev 2014;2(3):1–12.

end