asian journal of pharmaceutical sciences 9(2014)227e235

HOSTED BY

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
journal homepage: http://ees.elsevier.com/ajps/default.asp

Review

Nanotechnology and vaccine development
Mi-Gyeong Kim a, Joo Yeon Park a, Yuna Shon a, Gunwoo Kim b,
Gayong Shim a,*, Yu-Kyoung Oh a,*
a

College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742,
Republic of Korea
b
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science,
Seoul National University, Daehak-dong, Gwanank-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea

article info

abstract

Article history:

Despite the progress of conventional vaccines, improvements are clearly required due to

Received 28 March 2014

concerns about the weak immunogenicity of these vaccines, intrinsic instability in vivo,

Received in revised form

toxicity, and the need for multiple administrations. To overcome such problems, nano-

7 June 2014

technology platforms have recently been incorporated into vaccine development.

Accepted 9 June 2014

Nanocarrier-based delivery systems offer an opportunity to enhance the humoral and

Available online 18 June 2014

cellular immune responses. This advantage is attributable to the nanoscale particle size,
which facilitates uptake by phagocytic cells, the gut-associated lymphoid tissue, and the

Keywords:

mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue, leading to efficient antigen recognition and presen-

Nanotechnology

tation. Modifying the surfaces of nanocarriers with a variety of targeting moieties permits

Vaccine delivery

the delivery of antigens to specific cell surface receptors, thereby stimulating specific and

Liposomes

selective immune responses. In this review, we introduce recent advances in nanocarrier-

Emulsions

based vaccine delivery systems, with a focus on the types of carriers, including liposomes,

Polymeric nanocarriers

emulsions, polymer-based particles, and carbon-based nanomaterials. We describe the

Carbon nanomaterials

remaining challenges and possible breakthroughs, including the development of needlefree nanotechnologies and a fundamental understanding of the in vivo behavior and stability of the nanocarriers in nanotechnology-based delivery systems.
© 2014 Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is
an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).

1.

Introduction

The seasonal outbreaks of pantropic infection diseases have
elevated the development of effective vaccines to the status of
a global healthcare concern. Vaccines have been developed
using killed organisms [1], live attenuated organisms [2], or
inactivated toxins [3]. Recently, subunit vaccines [4], and DNA

vaccines that encode antigenic pathogenic proteins [5] have
been examined as new vaccine modalities. Although subunit
vaccines and DNA vaccines have the advantages of a high
safety profile over traditional vaccine, these vaccines suffer
from a relatively lower immunogenicity. The immunogenicity
may potentially be improved by modulating the vaccine
formulation using nanotechnology.

* Corresponding authors. Tel: þ82 2 880 2493; fax: þ82 2 882 2493.
E-mail addresses: shimg@snu.ac.kr (G. Shim), ohyk@snu.ac.kr (Y.-K. Oh).
Peer review under responsibility of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajps.2014.06.002
1818-0876/© 2014 Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).

228

The nanotechnologies developed for use in the field of
vaccines encompass nanocarriers having a variety of compositions, sizes, and surface properties [6]. Numerous vaccine
nanocarriers have been designed and investigated for their
utility in the delivery of antigens and adjuvants to immune
cells in an effort to promote a protective immune response.
Unfortunately, although antigens may be taken up by the
immune cells, insufficient adjuvant activity may result in
limited immunogenicity. In some approaches, nanocarriers
have been designed to co-deliver both an antigen and an
adjuvant [7]. Nanocarriers can facilitate the targeting and/or
sustained release of antigens or adjuvants to antigenpresenting cells [8,9].
Working mechanisms of nanotechnology-based vaccine
formulations support the utility of nanocarriers in the vaccine
fields. Particles smaller than 10 mm are readily taken up by
phagocytic cells, such as macrophages and dendritic cells
(DC). This property has been used to improve the cellular
uptake of antigens, thereby increasing the efficiency of antigen recognition and presentation [10]. Solid nanocarriers can
protect protein-based antigen vaccines from degradation and
facilitate entry into the gut-associated lymphoid tissue and
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues, rendering them appropriate for vaccine delivery via oral or mucosal routes [11].
Surface-modified nanocarriers may assist the targeted delivery of antigens. Immune cells express a variety of surface
receptors, including the mannose receptor, scavenger receptor, and toll-like receptors (TLR) [12]. Nanocarriers coated with
immune cell-targeting molecules, such as carbohydrates [13],
antibodies [14], and peptides [15], may target these overexpressed receptors to improve the efficiency of antigen and
adjuvant delivery toward the promotion of specific and selective immune responses in prophylactic vaccines.
This review provides an overview of recent advances in
nanocarrier vaccine systems, including liposomes, emulsions,
polymer-based nanodelivery systems, and carbon-based
nanodelivery systems (Fig. 1). The current status of in vivo
applications of nanocarriers is summarized in Table 1.

2.

Nanodelivery systems for vaccines

2.1.

Liposomes

Since the first report that liposomes can act as immunological
adjuvants [16], liposome formulations (Fig. 1A) have been
extensively studied for use in vaccine delivery systems. As of
this publication, at least 8 liposomal vaccines are in clinical
trials or have been approved for human use [17]. The physicochemical properties of liposomes, including their size, lipid
composition, and structure, may be modulated according to
the properties of the vaccine antigen to maximize immunogenicity. Liposomes are composed of biocompatible phospholipid bilayers and are capable of loading and delivering both
hydrophilic and hydrophobic molecules. These properties
enable the co-delivery of antigen and other molecules, such as
adjuvants. The surfaces of liposomes may be easily modified
using the appropriate functionally active lipid as a component
of the lipid bilayer. Surface-modified liposomes have been
designed
to
target
immune
cells,
co-deliver

Fig. 1 e Structure of nanocarriers for vaccine antigen
delivery. (A) Liposomes, (B) emulsions, (C) polymeric
nanoparticles, and (D) graphene oxide nanosheets.

immunostimulatory agents, and enhance both the humoral
and cell-mediated immune responses simultaneously to
improve the efficacy of liposomal vaccines.
The physicochemical properties of liposomes, such as their
size and fluidity, are important for the induction of an immune response. The vesicle sizes of liposomes composed of
cationic dimethyldioctadecylammonium (DDA) can affect the
cell-mediated immune response, but not the humoral immune response [18]. Liposomes larger than 2 mm in diameter
were found to effectively promote interleukin-10 production,
whereas liposomes 500 nm in diameter promoted a higher
level of interferon-g production in splenocytes.
Small unilamellar vesicles composed of cationic DDA liposomes were found to produce higher CD8 T cell responses
compared to the larger multilamellar vesicles [19]. A recent
study reported that rigid DDA lipid-based liposomes produced
a Th1-directed immune response against antigens that was
100 times greater than the response produced by fluidic
dimethyldioleoylammonium (DODA)-based liposomes [20].
The liposomal delivery of protein antigens via surface
adsorption methods may be optimized by tuning the surface
antigen and lipid ratio. The protein surface antigen-to-lipid
ratio can affect the aggregation behavior of liposomes and
can impact general vaccine stability during storage [21]. Surface modifications to antigen-carrying liposomes gearing
polyethylene glycol (PEG) groups can reduce liposome aggregation. However, the retention of the liposomes at the injection sites was simultaneously reduced, thereby altering the
Th1/Th2 immune response compared to the response produced by unmodified liposomes [22].
The liposomal co-delivery of antigens and an immunostimulatory molecule can enhance the generation of a protective
immune response. The entrapment of trehalose 6,6-dibehenate
(TDB), an immunostimulatory molecule, within a liposome did
not affect the physicochemical properties of neutral distearoylsn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC) or cationic DDA-based liposomes, and significantly increased the production of IFN-g
after immunization [23]. Monophosphoryl lipid A (MPL), a
poorly soluble TLR 4 agonist, was added to the bilayers of

Antigen

cationic liposomes composed of DDA and TBD to increase
liposome membrane packing and reduce the surface charges.
The MPL/DDA/TDB liposomal formulation carried ovalbumin
(OVA) as a model antigen. In mice, the presence of MPL in
liposomes did not affect the humoral immune response, but
significantly enhanced the antigen-specific CD8þ T cell immune response [24]. Some studies reported the use of an adjuvant formulation comprising liposomes containing an
immunostimulatory molecule. The co-administration of a
trivalent influenza vaccine and cationic liposomes containing
TDB was found to augment both the humoral and the cellular
immune responses [25].
Interbilayer-crosslinked multilamellar vesicles were
recently designed and tested as nanocarriers for protein antigens [26]. The vesicles were formed by crosslinking the head
groups of lipid bilayers within anionic mutilamellar vesicles
composed of 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC),
1,2-di-(9Z-octadecenoyl)-snglycero-3-phospho-(1'-rac-glycerol)
(DOPG) and maleimide-headgroup lipid 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[4-(p-maleimidophenyl) butyramide (MPB). Interbilayer crosslinking via divalent magnesium
cation-based fusion permitted the stable entrapment of

protein antigens within the core and lipophilic immunostimulatory molecules within the lipid membranes. OVA was used as
a model antigen to demonstrate that the interbilayercrosslinked vesicles provided the sustained release of antigens
and enhanced the antigen-specific CD8þ T cell immune
response in comparison with the uncrosslinked liposomes.
Nickel-chelating liposomes were examined for their potential use in His-tag-mediated antigen vaccine loading [27].
Nickel-chelating liposomes 100 nm in size were prepared
using egg phosphatidylcholine (EPC) and a nickel-chelating
lipid, 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-[N(5-amino-1-carboxypentyl)
iminodiacetic acid] succinyl nickel salt (DOGS-NTA-Ni), in a
molar ratio of 95:5. The His-tagged heat shock protein from
Candida albicans was loaded onto the surfaces of the nickelchelating liposomes via the formation of metallochelating
bonds by incubating the antigens with the liposomes.
Nickel-chelating liposomes have also been prepared by
incorporating nitrilotriacetic acid lipid derivatives into the
liposomes to promote bonding to polyhistidinylated OVA
antigens [28]. The liposomes were composed of DOGS-NTANi,
dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine
(DMPC),
dimyristoylphosphatidylglycerol (DMPG), cholesterol, and MPL

Although these metallochelating liposomes offer meaningful progress toward recombinant protein antigen loading
without covalently modifying the antigens, the toxicity of
the nickel-chelating lipids presents certain safety concerns
for clinical applications.
Liposomes-in-oil adjuvant formulations were found to
prolong the immune response after vaccination [29]. Diphtheria toxoids were co-encapsulated with poly (I:C) in a liposome composed of lecithin and cholesterol (9:1 M ratio). The
subcutaneous injection of the liposomes suspended in oil
(Marcol 52:Montanide 888, 9:1) generated a persistent immune
response by reducing antigen transport to the draining lymph
nodes.
Cationic liposomes have been examined for their ability to
enhance the adjuvanticity of nucleic acid-based TLR agonists.
Liposomes composed of the cationic lipid octadecenolyoxy
[ethyl-2-heptadecenyl-3 hydroxyethyl] imidazolinium chloride and cholesterol were complexed to the TLR agonist CpGbased plasmid DNA [30]. The intramuscular administration of
the combination of lipoplexes and Fluzone, an influenza
vaccine, was shown to provide an enhanced antibody
response and cell immunity in mice [30] and in elderly rhesus
macaques [31].

2.2.

Emulsions

Emulsions have been long studied as adjuvant formulations
and more recently studied as vaccine delivery systems.
Emulsions are dispersions of two or more immiscible liquids
composed of oil, emulsifiers, and excipients (Fig. 1B). Two
broad classes of emulsions may be formed: water-in-oil
emulsions and oil-in-water emulsions. The latter emulsion
type is typically used in adjuvant formulations.
The most famous vaccine adjuvant emulsion is MF59. MF59
consists of squalene oil, Span 85, and Tween 80 in a citrate
buffer. The MF59-adjuvanted seasonal flu vaccine (Fluad™)
was approved in Europe in 1997 [32]. MF59 can effectively increase the immune response in infants and young children
[33]. A recent study investigated the role of each component of
MF59 toward the adjuvant properties [34]. Span 85 was found
to activate the muscle transcriptome. However, Span 85 alone
did not provide an efficient immune response comparable to
that of MF59.
MF59 was studied for its ability to augment the induction of
antibodies against meningococcal protein antigens [35] and
the Neisseria meningitidis B vaccine [36]. The delivery of recombinant meningococcal B protein antigens in conjunction
with the TLR4 agonist, E6020, within MF59 was shown to cause
a strong antigen-specific CD4 T-cell response after three
staged intramuscular injections into CD-1 mice [35].
AF03, another squalene-based emulsion, has been used as a
vaccine adjuvant. AF03, which consists of squalene, sorbitan
oleate, and cetheareth-12, is present in the marketed influenza
vaccine, Humenza™. Recently, the physicochemical properties
of AF03 were characterized to evaluate the long-term stability
of the formulation. The surfactants in AF03 were analyzed
using mass spectroscopy and high-performance liquid
chromatography-mass spectroscopy as quality control tests in
emulsion manufacturing processes [37,38].

In addition to the squalene-based MF59 and AF03 emulsions, adjuvant nanoemulsion formulations have been
developed without squalene. For example, an aqueous
dispersion of W805EC, composed of cetyl pyridinium chloride,
Tween 80, ethanol, and soybean oil, in phosphate-buffered
saline or 0.9% NaCl was found to promote an immune
response to the model antigen OVA via intranasal administration [39]. The nasal adjuvanticity of the W805EC nanoemulsion was attributed to dendritic cell engulfment of
antigen-loaded epithelial cells [40].
Glucopyranosyl lipid A (GLA), a TLR4 agonist, has been
tested for its adjuvanticity in the context of oil-in-water
emulsion vaccine antigen formulations. For example, GMZ2,
a fusion protein component in an anti-falciparum vaccine,
was combined with GLA in an oil-in-water emulsion vaccine
formulation [41]. The immunostimulatory properties of GLA
were then compared with the properties of several other
immunostimulatory agents formulated with GMZ2. GLA was
found to display the highest antigen-specific IgG2a and total
IgG titers. Another study reported that the immunogenicity of
a recombinant Plasmodium vivax protein vaccine could be
enhanced by subcutaneously co-delivering the vaccine with
GLA in an oil-in-water emulsion formulation [42]. The intradermal administration of GLA within oil-in-water emulsions
to human skin explants was found to enhance the capacity of
skin DCs to activate both CD4þ T cells and the emigration of
Langerhans cells within skin tissues [43]. Oil-in-water emulsions containing GLA and recombinant hemagglutinin are
currently in phase 2 clinical trials for the prevention of seasonal influenza [44]. The adjuvanticity of the hemagglutinin
emulsion prepared with GLA was found to increase the titers
of hemagglutinin-specific antibodies relative to the formulation prepared without GLA, following intramuscular administration to healthy adults.
The successful commercialization of squalene-based
emulsions in marketed vaccines suggests that emulsion adjuvant approaches warrant further exploration. Formulation
stability during storage and the development of biocompatible
oil components may be crucial concerns for the development of
new emulsion formulations for vaccine delivery.

2.3.

Synthetic polymer-based nanodelivery systems

Polymeric nanocarriers (Fig. 1C) have been examined as vaccine delivery systems to take advantage of their ability to offer
the controlled release of antigens or adjuvants. Poly(lactic-coglycolic acid) (PLGA) is the most widely used biodegradable
synthetic polymer nanocarrier with a relatively long history of
biomedical use. The PLGA particle size has been varied and
surface modifications have been introduced into vaccine formulations for use in oral, mucosal, and systemic delivery.
The sizes, surface modification, and release profiles of
PLGA particles were shown to affect the immunogenicity of
entrapped antigens. The average size of an aerosolized PLGA
or poly(L-lactic acid)-based nanoparticle pulmonary hepatitis
B virus vaccine formulation was suggested to influence the
immunogenicity of the antigen [45]. Nanoparticles larger than
500 nm induced the generation of antigen-specific secretary
IgA more effectively than smaller nanoparticles (<500 nm) in
rats.

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 9 ( 2 0 1 4 ) 2 2 7 e2 3 5

The surfaces of the PLGA polymeric nanoparticles were
modified with lipids to enable the co-delivery of antigens and
adjuvants [46]. In a recent study the OVA antigen was covalently anchored to a pegylated phospholipid bilayer coating
formed on the PLGA nanoparticle surfaces, and a lipid adjuvant,
such as MPL or a-galactosylceramide, was incorporated into the
lipid bilayer. Subcutaneous co-delivery of OVA with MPL in the
surface lipid coating of PLGA nanoparticles was shown to
enhance the antigen-specific IgG titer values more than 10
folds. Other groups have conjugated a candidate P. vivax malaria antigen, VMP001, to the surfaces of lipid-coated PLGA
particles, and MPL has been incorporated into the lipid membranes [47]. In the study PLGA particle surfaces were coated
with lipids composed of DOPC, DOPG, and 1,2-distearoyl-snglycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[maleimide].
The prolonged release of antigens delivered by PLGA
nanoparticles was shown to enhance the immune response to
the model OVA antigen [8]. PLGA nanoparticles provided an
OVA release profile that extended over 10 weeks and was
much slower than the release profile obtained from a liposomal formulation. In line with the sustained release profile,
an OVAePLGA particulate vaccine formulation induced a
higher antibody titer compared to the liposome formulation 8
weeks after subcutaneous administration in mice.
The synthetic PLGA vaccine SEL-068 (Selecta Bioscience,
Inc., USA) is now in phase I clinical trials for the prevention of
nicotine addiction and relapse (http://www.selectabio.com).
SEL-068 was designed to facilitate smoking cessation and is
the first nano-vaccine to enter clinical trials. The SEL-068
formulation incorporates a universal peptide antigen for
eliciting T helper cell response and an immunostimulating
TLR agonist into the PLGA polymer matrix. Nicotine, a B cell
antigen, is covalently linked to the nanoparticle surfaces. No
dose-limiting systemic toxicities were observed in a repeatdose GLP safety and efficacy study in cynomolgus monkeys.
Other biodegradable polymers, including poly (ε-caprolactone) and polyanhydrides, have been tested for their utility
in vaccine delivery applications. The H1N1 hemagglutinin
antigen was incorporated into chitosan-coated polycaprolactone nanoparticles. Intranasal delivery of the chitosanepolycaprolactone
nanocarriers
containing
H1N1
hemagglutinin was shown to produce serum IgG levels and
secretory IgA levels in nasal and lung lavage that were higher
than those produced following intranasal delivery of the soluble antigen to Balb/c mice [48].
Polyanhydride nanocarriers have been tested as vaccine
delivery systems to take advantage of their biodegradable and
safety profiles. Polyanhydride nanoparticles containing Yersinia pestis antigens were examined for intranasal vaccination
[49]. The recombinant protein F1eV was co-loaded with the
adjuvant MPL to induce the generation of F1eV-specific antibodies detected 23 weeks post-vaccination. Polyanhydride
microparticles were shown to be taken up by DC cells and to
induce antigen-specific proliferation of both CD4þ and CD8þ
T cells [50].
Numerous polymeric nanoparticles have been designed to
physically entrap antigens within polymer matrices. Electrostatic polyplexes have also been tested for their utility in
delivering subunit antigens [51] or plasmid DNA vaccines
[52,53]. Hepatitis B surface antigen was loaded onto cationic L-

231

poly lactic acid microspheres via the formation of electrostatic
complexes [51]. A single subcutaneous immunization with
HBsAg complexed onto the surfaces of cationic microspheres
was found to induce comparable levels of serum IgG responses and higher cellular immune responses as compared
to two injections of HBsAg with adjuvant alum in a mouse
model.
Cationic polymers have been used to form complexes with
negatively charged plasmid DNA vaccines. Deacylated
cationic polyethyleneimine was used to form complexes with
the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) CN54gp140 antigen
[52]. Pulmonary administration of the polyplexes elicited an
immune response and protected the immunized mice against
viral challenge. PEGylated poly [2-(N,N-dimethylamino)ethyl
methacrylate] was used to deliver HIV gag DNA vaccine [53].
Intranasal administration of the polyplexes was observed to
enhance the gag-specific serum IgG levels and IFN-g secreting
splenocytes in mice as compared to the naked DNA vaccinetreated group.
Synthetic polymer-based vaccine delivery systems can
provide a sustained release profile for vaccine antigens over
prolonged periods of time. The release profile may be tuned by
controlling the molecular weights of the synthetic polymers
and the encapsulation conditions. Relatively few biodegradable and biocompatible synthetic polymeric delivery systems
have been tested to date, and the safety profiles of the biodegradation products have not been extensively studied. Progress
in the field of biodegradable polymer development is anticipated to accelerate polymer-based vaccine delivery studies.

2.4.

Natural biopolymer-based nanodelivery systems

Natural biopolymers, including chitosan and pullulan, have
been studied as vaccine or adjuvant delivery systems. Chitosan is biocompatible, nontoxic, biodegradable, and provides a
cationic charge that may facilitate endocytosis. In the context
of vaccine delivery, chitosan displays valuable properties,
including mucoadhesiveness and an adjuvanticity that acts by
promoting the maturation of DCs.
The mucoadhesiveness of chitosan has been exploited in
mucosal vaccine delivery formulations. A recent study
showed that an N-trimethyl chitosan nanocarrier carrying a
model antigen OVA provided prolonged residence in nasal
mucosa compared to PLGA nanoparticles bearing the same
antigen [54]. Whereas intramuscularly administered N-trimethyl chitosan-based vaccine formulations provided immune responses that were comparable to those generated by
the PLGA-based vaccine, intranasally administered N-trimethyl chitosan-based vaccine formulations induced higher
antigen-specific secretory IgA levels compared to PLGA carriers. These results suggest the importance of mucoadhesiveness in vaccine carriers for enhancing the induction of
mucosal immunity.
Chitosan nanoparticles were studied as mucosal vaccine
delivery systems [55]. Chitosan nanoparticles that encapsulated the hemagglutinin-split influenza virus were prepared
by ionically crosslinking the chitosan polymers in the presence of sodium tripolyphosphate. Two intranasal vaccination
doses of the hemagglutinin-split influenza virus entrapped in
chitosan nanoparticles induced higher systemic and mucosal

232

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 9 ( 2 0 1 4 ) 2 2 7 e2 3 5

antibody responses compared to the responses generated by a
vaccine prepared from the hemagglutinin-split influenza
virus alone in mice.
The intracellular fate of the HBsAg encapsulated in chitosan nanoparticles has been examined [56]. The cellular fates
of the HBsAg and chitosan nanoparticles were followed by
fluorescently labeling the HBsAg and chitosan with Cy3 and
Cy5, respectively. The HBsAg-containing chitosan nanoparticles were found to be endocytosed by bone marrowderived DC, and the HBsAg was found to dissociate from the
nanoparticles 6 h after cellular uptake. The dissociation of
HBsAg from the chitosan nanoparticles was thought to result
from the chitosan matrix degradation in the lysosome.
Cholesteryl-conjugated pullulan polymer-based nanoscale
hydrogels were studied as potential vaccine vehicles [57]. A
non-toxic subunit fragment of the Clostridium botulinum typeA neurotoxin BoHc/A was loaded into the nanogel and
administered intranasally. The viscosity of the nanogel promoted the retention of BoHc/A in the nasal mucosal layer.
After release from the nanogel, BoHc/A was taken up by the
mucosal DCs. The intranasal nanogel formulations provided
high titers of the antigen-neutralizing serum IgG and antigenspecific sIgA in the absence of additional mucosal adjuvants.
Synthetic and natural polymer hybrid vaccine delivery
systems have been investigated. For example, chitosancoated polycaprolactone nanoparticles were developed for
the intranasal delivery of the recombinant influenza A virus
(A/California/07/2009) H1N1 hemagglutinin protein [48]. About
66.5% of entrapped antigens were released from the nanoparticles over 63 days. A single intranasal immunization with
the antigen-loaded chitosan-coated polycaprolactone nanoparticles resulted in a total IgG response that exceeded the
response achieved after a booster intramuscular administration of the free subunit antigen solution in Balb/c mice.

2.5.

Carbon-based nanodelivery systems

Carbon-based nanomaterials and carbon nanotubes in
particular were recently investigated as antigen delivery systems [58]. Carbon-based nanodelivery systems are insoluble,
non-degradable, and mimic bacteria in size and shape. Carbon
nanotubes are not intrinsically immunogenic, display a low
toxicity, are capable of carrying multiple antigens, and are
taken up rapidly by antigen-presenting cells. Such features
support the feasibility of using carbon nanotubes as antigen
carriers.
Zeinali and colleagues examined the utility of singlewalled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) in vaccine delivery systems [59]. A purified tuberculin protein derivative was loaded
onto a carboxyl group-functionalized SWCNT through covalent binding. Following subcutaneous administration, the
antigeneSWCNT conjugate was found to stimulate the production by Th1 cells of cytokines, such as IFN-g and IL-12, at
levels comparable to those generated through administration
of the conventional tuberculosis BCG vaccine.
A recent study reported the importance of carbon nanotube type on the induction of immunogenicity [60]. In the
study, a commercially available fungicide azoxystrobin was
loaded onto four types of carbon nanotube (short and singlewalled, short and multi-walled, long and single-walled, and

long and multi-walled). The resulting immune responses were
then compared. The short and multi-walled carbon nanotubes
0.5 mm in length and 50 nm in diameter were found to provide
the highest anti-azoxystrobin IgG antibody titers in rabbits.
Carbon magnetic nanoparticles were constructed to permit
the tracing of carbon-based vehicles [61]. Magnetic resonance
imaging data showed that magnetic nanoparticles 20e80 nm
in diameter were rapidly distributed to the spleen, followed by
the kidneys and the inguinal lymph nodes. The preferential
targeting of carbon magnetic nanoparticles to DCs was used to
enrich DCs ex vivo using an external magnet. The biotinylated
model antigen hen egg lysozyme protein and the biotinylated
TLR ligand CpG were attached to avidin-coated carbon magnetic nanoparticles to improve the induction of T cell activation and antigen-specific IFN-g responses compared to the
free protein antigen.
The nanostructures of carbon-based materials were reported to affect the antigen presentation process [62]. Graphene oxide nanosheets (Fig. 1D) differed from C60 fullerenes
in its ability to promote antigen presentation to the T cells. C60
fullerenes stimulated MHC class I antigen presentation of
OVA, whereas graphene oxide suppressed antigen presentation by DCs. Moreover, unlike the C60 fullerenes, graphene
oxide reduced the immunoproteasomes in DCs.
Although most carbon-based vaccine delivery systems
have been tested through systemic administration, a recent
study examined the feasibility of using carbon nanoparticles for oral vaccine delivery [63]. Carbon nanoparticles
470 nm in diameter bearing 40e60 nm pores were synthesized using silica as a template. Instead of loading the antigens via surface adsorption, the model antigen, bovine
serum albumin, was encapsulated within the meso- and
macropores of the nanoparticles. The rigid structure of the
nanoparticles resisted destruction in the oral digestive tract
and appeared to protect the antigens from the harsh environments of the alimentary canal after oral delivery. In
this study, the IgG and cytokine immune responses elicited
by the oral bovine serum albumin entrapped in the porous
nanoparticles were comparable to those elicited by parenteral administration of bovine serum albumin with Freund's
adjuvant.
Carbon-based nanomaterial vaccine delivery systems are
relatively new and less well studied than other systems.
Several investigations have indicated the feasibility of carbonbased systems for systemic or oral antigen delivery. Future
developments should demonstrate whether the lack of
biodegradability will promote or reduce the safety of a carbonbased nano delivery system.

3.

Current & future developments

Nanotechnology-based vaccine delivery systems have been
developed to enhance the immunogenicity of a vaccine antigen by modulating antigen delivery to the immune cells.
Nanocarrier formulations of vaccines offer the advantages of
co-delivery of antigen and immunomodulator [64]. Numerous
studies have reported enhanced immunogenicity of
nanocarrier-based vaccines upon co-delivery with an immunomodulator. Single immunization of OVA and MPL co-

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 9 ( 2 0 1 4 ) 2 2 7 e2 3 5

formulated with the PLGA nanocarrier induced much higher
systemic and mucosal immune responses after oral delivery
than OVA alone [65]. Micelle formulations that include a PEGmodified cationic polypeptide can co-deliver OVA and TLR3
agonists while increasing vaccine-induced antibody production by more than a factor of 70 [66]. The subcutaneous
vaccination of pH-responsive micelle nanoparticles containing amphiphilic diblock copolymers conjugated to OVA and
CpG oligonucleotides displayed remarkably higher CD8þ T
cell responses compared with the free form or a physical
mixture [67].
In addition to the co-delivery of antigens and immunomodulators, modifying the surfaces of nanocarriers can
contribute to the delivery of antigens specifically to relevant
immune cells. Imiquimod (TLR7 agonist)-entrapped PLGA
nanocarriers were coated with a chitosan derivative (N,N,Ntrimethylated chitosan) to improve the protective response
generated by mucosal immunization [68]. Another chitosan
derivative, glycol chitosan, was decorated onto the surfaces of
PLGA nanoparticles for use in a nasal vaccination [69]. Glycol
chitosan-coated PLGA nanoparticles showed a lower clearance rate and a higher local uptake in the nasal cavity
compared with chitosan-coated PLGA nanocarriers.
Multifunctional nanovaccines can significantly increase
the immune response generated by the target-specific, effective, and stable delivery of an antigen. However, the use of
many-component nanovaccines with complex structures can
increase production costs and complicate the manufacturing
process. Many nanovaccines have been manufactured in
small batches for research use [70]. Batch-to-batch variations
with respect to particle size, shape, and quality are critical
problems in the area of nanoparticle synthesis, and these
problems must be addressed during scale-up for clinical trial
testing [71,72]. Surface-modified nanoparticulate vaccines
require complicated synthesis procedures that can require
complex purification processes and high expenses. Scale-up
processes tend to be time-consuming for pharmaceutical applications. Self-assembled nanovaccine technologies would
be beneficial for reducing obstacles to the development of
industrial-scale manufacturing protocols.

4.

Conclusions

Nanotechnology platforms present promising strategies for
improving the immunogenicity of a vaccine antigen. Nanocarriers that are useful for the formulation and delivery of
antigens and adjuvants offer many advantages over alternative adjuvant approaches, including improved stability, sustained release kinetics, lower immunotoxicity, and targeting
to specific and selective immune cells. In addition, nanoparticles efficiently deliver antigens due to their nanoscale
size, solid form, ease of surface modification, and ability to
co-deliver antigens along with adjuvants. Although the applications of nanotechnologies for nanocarrier-based vaccine
delivery are currently in a nascent investigational stage, and
only a few products are being tested in clinical trials, these
vaccine delivery systems may potentially be used more
broadly for the prevention and treatment of infectious
disease.

233

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by grants from the Korean Health
Technology R&D project, Ministry of Health and Welfare
(Grant No. A092010), and from Ministry of Science, ICT and
Future Planning (No. 2014023227), and from Business for
Cooperative R&D between Industry, Academy, and Research
Institute funded Korea Small and Medium Business Administration (No. C0010962).

references

[1] Naiman BM, Alt D, Bolin CA, et al. Protective killed leptospira
borgpetersenii vaccine induces potent Th1 immunity
comprising responses by CD4 and gd T lymphocytes. Infect
Immun 2001;69:7550e7558.
[2] Epstein JE, Tewari K, Lyke KE, et al. Live attenuated malaria
vaccine designed to protect through hepatic CD8þ T cell
immunity. Science 2011;334:475e480.
[3] Saha A, Chowdhury MI, Nazim M, et al. Vaccine specific
immune response to an inactivated oral cholera vaccine and
EPI vaccines in a high and low arsenic area in Bangladeshi
children. Vaccine 2013;31:647e652.
[4] Norton EB, Lawson LB, Mahdi Z, et al. The A subunit of
Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin functions as a
mucosal adjuvant and promotes IgG2a, IgA, and Th17
responses to vaccine antigens. Infect Immun
2012;80:2426e2435.
€ derholm J, et al. Coexpressed RIG-I
[5] Luke JM, Simon GG, So
agonist enhances humoral immune response to influenza
virus DNA vaccine. J Virol 2011;85:1370e1383.
[6] Peek LJ, Middaugh CR, Berkland C. Nanotechnology in
vaccine delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2008;60:915e928.
[7] Dunkle A, Blanchette C, Boone T, et al. Co-delivery of
adjuvant and subunit antigens via a nanoparticle platform
induces tissue-associated and systemic adaptive immune
responses (P4409). J Immunol 2013;190:205e214.
[8] Demento SL, Cui W, Criscione JM, et al. Role of sustained
antigen release from nanoparticle vaccines in shaping the T
cell memory phenotype. Biomaterials 2012;33:4957e4964.
[9] Gregory AE, Titball R, Williamson D. Vaccine delivery using
nanoparticles. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 2013;3:1e13.
[10] Oyewumi MO, Kumar A, Cui Z. Nano-microparticles as
immune adjuvants: correlating particle sizes and the
resultant immune responses. Expert Rev Vaccines
2010;9:1095e1107.
[11] Borges O, Borchard G, Verhoef JC, et al. Preparation of coated
nanoparticles for a new mucosal vaccine delivery system. Int
J Pharm 2005;299:155e166.
[12] Apostolopoulos V, Thalhammer T, Tzakos AG, et al.
Targeting antigens to dendritic cell receptors for vaccine
development. J Drug Deliv 2013. ePub.
[13] Lepenies B, Lee J, Sonkaria S. Targeting C-type lectin
receptors with multivalent carbohydrate ligands. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev 2013;65:1271e1281.
[14] Raghuwanshi D, Mishra V, Suresh MR, et al. A simple
approach for enhanced immune response using engineered
dendritic cell targeted nanoparticles. Vaccine
2012;30:7292e7299.
[15] Misumi S, Masuyama M, Takamune N, et al. Targeted
delivery of immunogen to primate M cells with tetragalloyl
lysine dendrimer. J Immunol 2009;182:6061e6070.
[16] Allison AG, Gregoriadis G. Liposomes as immunological
adjuvants. Nature 1974;252:252.

234

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 9 ( 2 0 1 4 ) 2 2 7 e2 3 5

[17] Watson DS, Endsley AN, Huang L. Design considerations for
liposomal vaccines: influence of formulation parameters on
antibody and cell-mediated immune responses to liposome
associated antigens. Vaccine 2012;30:2256e2272.
[18] Henriksen-Lacey M, Devitt A, Perrie Y. The vesicle size of
DDA: TDB liposomal adjuvants plays a role in the
cell-mediated immune response but has no significant
effect on antibody production. J Control Release
2011;154:131e137.
[19] Milicic A, Kaur R, Reyes-Sandoval A, et al. Small cationic
DDA: TDB liposomes as protein vaccine adjuvants obviate
the need for TLR agonists in inducing cellular and humoral
responses. PLoS One 2012;7:e34255.
[20] Christensen D, Henriksen-Lacey M, Kamath AT, et al. A
cationic vaccine adjuvant based on a saturated quaternary
ammonium lipid have different in vivo distribution kinetics
and display a distinct CD4 T cell-inducing capacity compared
to its unsaturated analog. J Control Release 2012;160:468e476.
[21] Hamborg M, Jorgensen L, Bojsen AR, et al. Protein antigen
adsorption to the DDA/TDB liposomal adjuvant: effect on
protein structure, stability, and liposome physicochemical
characteristics. Pharm Res 2013;30:140e155.
[22] Kaur R, Bramwell VW, Kirby DJ, et al. Pegylation of DDA: TDB
liposomal adjuvants reduces the vaccine depot effect and
alters the Th1/Th2 immune responses. J Control Release
2012;158:72e77.
[23] McNeil SE, Rosenkrands I, Agger EM, et al. Subunit vaccines:
distearoylphosphatidylcholine-based liposomes entrapping
antigen offer a neutral alternative to
dimethyldioctadecylammonium-based cationic liposomes
as an adjuvant delivery system. J Pharm Sci
2011;100:1856e1865.
[24] Nordly P, Agger EM, Andersen P, et al. Incorporation of the
TLR4 agonist monophosphoryl lipid A into the bilayer of
DDA/TDB liposomes: physico-chemical characterization and
induction of CD8þ T-cell responses in vivo. Pharm Res
2011;28:553e562.
[25] Rosenkrands I, Vingsbo-Lundberg C, Bundgaard TJ, et al.
Enhanced humoral and cell-mediated immune responses
after immunization with trivalent influenza vaccine
adjuvanted with cationic liposomes. Vaccine
2011;29:6283e6291.
[26] Moon JJ, Suh H, Bershteyn A, et al. Interbilayer-crosslinked
multilamellar vesicles as synthetic vaccines for potent
humoral and cellular immune responses. Nat Mater
2011;10:243e251.
[27] Ma
sek J, Bartheldyova E, Turanek-Knotigova P, et al.
Metallochelating liposomes with associated lipophilised
norAbuMDP as biocompatible platform for construction of
vaccines with recombinant His-tagged antigens: preparation,
structural study and immune response towards rHsp90.
J Control Release 2011;151:193e201.
[28] Watson DS, Platt VM, Cao L, et al. Antibody response to
polyhistidine-tagged peptide and protein antigens attached
to liposomes via lipid-linked nitrilotriacetic acid in mice. Clin
Vaccine Immunol 2011;18:289e297.
[29] de Veer M, Neeland M, Burke M, et al. Cell recruitment and
antigen trafficking in afferent lymph after injection of
antigen and poly(I: C) containing liposomes, in aqueous or
oil-based formulations. Vaccine 2013;31:1012e1018.
[30] Lay M, Callejo B, Chang S, et al. Cationic lipid/DNA complexes
(JVRS-100) combined with influenza vaccine (Fluzone)
increases antibody response, cellular immunity, and
antigenically drifted protection. Vaccine 2009;27:3811e3820.
[31] Carroll TD, Matzinger SR, Barry PA, et al. Efficacy of influenza
vaccination of elderly rhesus macaques is dramatically
improved by addition of a cationic lipid/DNA adjuvant.
J Infect Dis 2014;209:24e33.

[32] O’Hagan DT. MF59 is a safe and potent vaccine adjuvant that
enhances protection against influenza virus infection. Expert
Rev Vaccines 2007;6:699e710.
[33] Vesikari T, Knuf M, Wutzler P, et al. Oil-in-water emulsion
adjuvant with influenza vaccine in young children. N Engl J
Med 2011;365:1406e1416.
[34] Calabro S, Tritto E, Pezzotti A, et al. The adjuvant effect of
MF59 is due to the oil-in-water emulsion formulation, none
of the individual components induce a comparable adjuvant
effect. Vaccine 2013;31:3363e3369.
[35] Singh M, Kazzaz J, Ugozzoli M, et al. MF59 oil-in-water
emulsion in combination with a synthetic TLR4 agonist
(E6020) is a potent adjuvant for a combination
Meningococcus vaccine. Hum Vaccin Immunother
2012;8:486e490.
[36] Brito LA, Chan M, Baudner B, et al. An alternative renewable
source of squalene for use in emulsion adjuvants. Vaccine
2011;29:6262e6268.
[37] Klucker MF, Dalencon F, Probeck P, et al. AF03, an alternative
squalene emulsion-based vaccine adjuvant prepared by a
phase inversion temperature method. J Pharm Sci
2012;101:4490e4500.
[38] Cotte JF, Sonnery S, Martial F, et al. Characterization of
surfactants in an oil-in-water emulsion-based vaccine
adjuvant using MS and HPLC-MS: structural analysis and
quantification. Int J Pharm 2012;436:233e239.
[39] Makidon PE, Nigavekar SS, Bielinska AU, et al.
Characterization of stability and nasal delivery systems for
immunization with nanoemulsion-based vaccines. J Aerosol
Med Pulm Drug Deliv 2010;23:77e89.
[40] Myc A, Kukowska-Latallo JF, Smith DM, et al.
Nanoemulsion nasal adjuvant W805EC induces dendritic
cell engulfment of antigen-primed epithelial cells. Vaccine
2013;31:1072e1079.
[41] Lousada-Dietrich S, Jogdand PS, Jepsen S, et al. A synthetic
TLR4 agonist formulated in an emulsion enhances humoral
and Type 1 cellular immune responses against GMZ2-a
GLURP-MSP3 fusion protein malaria vaccine candidate.
Vaccine 2011;29:3284e3292.
[42] Lumsden JM, Nurmukhambetova S, Klein JH, et al. Evaluation
of immune responses to a Plasmodium vivax CSP-based
recombinant protein vaccine candidate in combination with
second-generation adjuvants in mice. Vaccine
2012;30:3311e3319.
[43] Schneider LP, Schoonderwoerd AJ, Moutaftsi M, et al.
Intradermally administered TLR4 agonist GLA-SE enhances
the capacity of human skin DCs to activate T cells and
promotes emigration of Langerhans cells. Vaccine
2012;30:4216e4224.
[44] Treanor JJ, Essink B, Hull S, et al. Evaluation of safety and
immunogenicity of recombinant influenza hemagglutinin
(H5/Indonesia/05/2005) formulated with and without a stable
oil-in-water emulsion containing glucopyranosyl-lipid A
(SEþGLA) adjuvant. Vaccine 2013;31:5760e5765.
[45] Thomas C, Rawat A, Hope-Weeks L, et al. Aerosolized PLA and
PLGA nanoparticles enhance humoral, mucosal and cytokine
responses to hepatitis B vaccine. Mol Pharm 2011;8:405e415.
[46] Bershteyn A, Hanson MC, Crespo MP, et al. Robust IgG
responses to nanograms of antigen using a biomimetic lipidcoated particle vaccine. J Control Release 2012;157:354e365.
[47] Moon JJ, Suh H, Polhemus ME, et al. Antigen-displaying lipidenveloped PLGA nanoparticles as delivery agents for a
Plasmodium vivax malaria vaccine. PLoS One 2012;7:e31472.
[48] Gupta PN, Vyas SP. Investigation of lectinized liposomes as
M-cell targeted carrier-adjuvant for mucosal immunization.
Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 2011;82:118e125.
[49] Ulery BD, Kumar D, Ramer-Tait AE, et al. Design of a
protective single-dose intranasal nanoparticle-based vaccine

platform for respiratory infectious diseases. PLoS One
2011;6:e17642.
Torres MP, Wilson-Welder JH, Lopac SK, et al. Polyanhydride
microparticles enhance dendritic cell antigen presentation
and activation. Acta Biomater 2011;7:2857e2864.
Saini V, Jain V, Sudheesh MS, et al. Humoral and cellmediated immune-responses after administration of a
single-shot recombinant hepatitis B surface antigen vaccine
formulated with cationic poly(l-lactide) microspheres. J Drug
Target 2010;18:212e222.
JF1 Mann, McKay PF, Arokiasamy S, et al. Pulmonary delivery
of DNA vaccine constructs using deacylated PEI elicits
immune responses and protects against viral challenge
infection. J Control Release 2013;170:452e459.
Y1 Qiao, Huang Y, Qiu C, et al. The use of PEGylated poly
[2-(N,N-dimethylamino) ethyl methacrylate] as a mucosal
DNA delivery vector and the activation of innate immunity
and improvement of HIV-1-specific immune responses.
Biomaterials 2010;31:115e123.
Slutter B, Bal S, Keijzer C, et al. Nasal vaccination with
N-trimethyl chitosan and PLGA based nanoparticles:
nanoparticle characteristics determine quality and strength
of the antibody response in mice against the encapsulated
antigen. Vaccine 2010;28:6282e6291.
Sawaengsak C, Mori Y, Yamanishi K, et al. Chitosan
nanoparticle encapsulated hemagglutinin-split influenza
virus mucosal vaccine. AAPS PharmSciTech
2014;15:317e325.
Lugade AA, Bharali DJ, Pradhan V, et al. Single low-dose
un-adjuvanted HBsAg nanoparticle vaccine elicits robust,
durable immunity. Nanomedicine 2013;9:923e934.
Nochi T, Yuki Y, Takahashi H, et al. Nanogel antigenic
protein-delivery system for adjuvant-free intranasal
vaccines. Nat Mater 2010;9:572e578.
Scheinberg DA, McDevitt MR, Dao T, et al. Carbon nanotubes
as vaccine scaffolds. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2013;65:2016e2022.
Zeinali M, Jammalan M, Ardestani SK, et al. Immunological
and cytotoxicological characterization of tuberculin purified
protein derivative (PPD) conjugated to single-walled carbon
nanotubes. Immunol Lett 2009;126:48e53.
Parra J, Abad-Somovilla A, Mercader JV, et al. Carbon
nanotube-protein carriers enhance size-dependent
self-adjuvant antibody response to haptens. J Control
Release 2013;170:242e251.

235

[61] Schreiber HA, Prechl J, Jiang H, et al. Using carbon magnetic
nanoparticles to target, track, and manipulate dendritic cells.
J Immunol Methods 2010;356:47e59.
[62] Tkach AV, Yanamala N, Stanley S, et al. Graphene oxide, but
not fullerenes, targets immunoproteasomes and suppresses
antigen presentation by dendritic cells. Small
2013;9:1686e1690.
[63] Wang T, Zou M, Jiang H, et al. Synthesis of a novel kind of
carbon nanoparticle with large mesopores and macropores
and its application as an oral vaccine adjuvant. Eur J Pharm
Sci 2011;44:653e659.
sy B, Merkle HP. Particulate formulations
[64] Hafner AM, Corthe
for the delivery of poly(I: C) as vaccine adjuvant. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev 2013;65:1386e1399.
[65] Sarti F, Perera G, Hintzen F, et al. In vivo evidence of oral
vaccination with PLGA nanoparticles containing the
immunostimulant monophosphoryl lipid A. Biomaterials
2011;32:4052e4057.
[66] Luo Z, Li P, Deng J, et al. Cationic polypeptide micelle-based
antigen delivery system: a simple and robust adjuvant to
improve vaccine efficacy. J Control Release 2013;170:259e267.
[67] Wilson JT, Keller S, Manganiello MJ, et al. pH-responsive
nanoparticle vaccines for dual-delivery of antigens and
immunostimulatory oligonucleotides. ACS Nano
2013;7:3912e3925.
[68] Primard C, Poecheim J, Heuking S, et al. Multifunctional
PLGA-based nanoparticles encapsulating simultaneously
hydrophilic antigen and hydrophobic immunomodulator for
mucosal immunization. Mol Pharm 2013;10:2996e3004.
[69] Pawar D, Mangal S, Goswami R, et al. Development and
characterization of surface modified PLGA nanoparticles for
nasal vaccine delivery: effect of mucoadhesive coating on
antigen uptake and immune adjuvant activity. Eur J Pharm
Biopharm 2013;85:550e559.
[70] Marre S, Jensen KF. Synthesis of micro and nanostructures in
microfluidic systems. Chem Soc Rev 2010;39:1183e1202.
[71] Sebastian V, Arruebo M, Santamaria J. Reaction engineering
strategies for the production of inorganic nanomaterials.
Small 2013. ePub.
[72] Gomez L, Sebastian V, Irusta S, et al. Scaled-up production of
plasmonic nanoparticles using microfluidics: from metal
precursors to functionalized and sterilized nanoparticles.
Lab Chip 2014;14:325e332.

end
