Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology

ISSN: 2161-1459

Zhu and Sun, Clin Exp Pharmacol 2014, 5:1
DOI: 10.4172/2161-1459.1000166

Case Report

Open Access

Pharmaceutical Care in a Patient with Recurrent Infection after Liver
Transplant
Liqin Zhu1 and Xiaoye Sun2
1
2

Department of Pharmacy, Tianjin First Central Hospital, Tianjin, China
Department of Organ Transplant, Tianjin First Central Hospital, Tianjin, China

Abstract
Case (description): A case of a 57-year-old liver transplant patient with biliary drainage catheter whose recurrent
infection was managed by clinical pharmacists. The suggestions about the choice of antibiotic regimen and the
monitoring to other related infection factors, such as biliary drainage catheter and concentration of tracrolimus, were
accepted and used to the patient. The state of the infected patient was improved.
Conclusion: The antibiotics’ distribution, antibacterial effect, and drug resistance could be taken into consideration
for the patients with recurrent infection after liver transplant. The resistance of antibiotics could be deferred by altering
suitable antibiotics. Close care to catheter and immunosuppressants could be necessary to prevent infection for the
patients after transplant.

Keywords: Pharmaceutical care; Recurrent infection; Liver

transplant

Introduction
The recurrences of bacteria and virus infection are common
problems in liver transplant recipients because of the biliary drainage
catheter and their extended state of immunosuppression. In recent
years, gram-negative rods have emerged as the predominant pathogens
in solid organ transplant (SOT) recipients [1-3]. Among these gramnegative rods, Klebsiella pneumonia (K. pneumoniae) was the most
common bacteria identified in some case studies [3], and SOT has
been implicated as a factor predisposing patients to K. pneumoniae
bloodstream infection (BSI) [4]. Carbapenems, which are regarded
as effective agents for treating K. pneumonia infection, induce the
production and global spread of Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase
(KPC) [5]. Although polymyxin B combined with tigecycline could be
used for carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae (CRKP) [6], limitations
to the application of carbapenems are of great concern in K. pneumonia
therapy.
This case report provided a series of therapeutic strategies,
from view of the clinical pharmacist, in a patient with recurrent K.
pneumoniae infection after liver transplant.

Ethical approval: No approval was necessary
Case Report
The patient was a 57-year-old man diagnosed with Hepatitis B
virus (HBV)-related cirrhosis and type II diabetes. He underwent liver
transplant surgery in December 2009. After his surgery, ursodeoxycholic
acid and losartan potassium/hydrochlorothiazide were administered
discontinuously and biliary drainage catheter was kept in place because
of elevated bilirubin levels and blood pressure. Tacrolimus (FK506) was
administered at a decreasing dose and its concentration was within the
therapeutic window (Figure 1). He was examined by his physician at
the beginning of 2014 because of his recurrent infection in the third
year after surgery. The patient was tested for K. pneumoniae and
Enterococcus faecium 40 and 35 times, respectively, from December
2012 to March 2014. Most test results were normal. The patient suffered
infections for three times (one in December 2012 and two in January
2013) induced by K. pneumoniae. His white blood cell (WBC) count,
total bile acid (TBIL), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) varied during this period, and there was no
Clin Exp Pharmacol
ISSN: 2161-1459 CPECR, an open access journal

notable increase except for neutrophils (Neut) (Figure 2-6). WBC and
Neut were fluctuated. Neut were higher than normal for three times.
Although there were only three times abnormal blood chemistry data,
he was still administered meropenem intravenously when abnormal
bile occurred or when test results were positive for bacteria in his bile.
His blood sugar was well controlled in this period. The patient consulted
his doctor whether this anti-bacterial dosage regimen was suitable.
Considering the details of the patient and the general condition
(pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and drug resistance) of antibiotics, clinical
pharmacists provided the following suggestions. These suggestions were
accepted by the doctor. By applying the series of therapeutic strategies
to the patient, the state of the infected patient was improved.
1. Ensuring that the biliary drainage catheter was still in need.
If needed, careful care of the catheter was required, such as
inspecting and flushing the catheter twice daily, and emptying
collected drainage from the bag daily.
2. Carbapenems, cephalosporins, and broad-spectrum penicillin
antibiotics could be used in turn after confirming the infection
in the patient.
3. Monitoring tacrolimus concentrations to avoid low immunity
which could be result in infection.

Discussion
In special population of liver transplants, bacteria in bile were more
frequent. It was important that determining the relationship between
bacteria in bile and infection. Besides the antimicrobial spectrum of
antibiotics, pharmacokinetic parameters, especially the distribution

*Corresponding author: Liqin Zhu, Pharm D, Chinical Pharmacist, Pharmacy
Dept., Tianjin First Center Hospital, Tianjin, China, No.24 Fukang Road, Nankai
District, 300192, China, Tel: +86 022 23626417; E-mail: zlq0713@aliyun.com
Received November 04, 2014; Accepted November 28, 2014; Published
December 01, 2014
Citation: Zhu L, Sun X (2014) Pharmaceutical Care in a Patient with Recurrent
Infection after Liver Transplant. Clin Exp Pharmacol 4: 166. doi:10.4172/21611459.1000166
Copyright: © 2014 Zhu L, et al. This is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and
source are credited.

Concentration of FK506 (ng/ml)

Clin Exp Pharmacol
ISSN: 2161-1459 CPECR, an open access journal
Concentration(U/L)

of antibiotics, should be considered while choosing antibiotics for the
patients with recurrent infection.
K. pneumoniae [7] and Enterococcus faecium [8] were common
bacteria in the human intestinal tract. Only under certain conditions
could infections be induced. For this patient, the liver transplant
surgery and extended use of immunosuppressants after surgery, which
Clin Exp Pharmacol
ISSN: 2161-1459 CPECR, an open access journal

maintained reduced immunity, made infection easier. Moreover, the
biliary drainage catheter and diabetes also increase the incidence of
infection.
While infection occurred after liver transplant, antibiotic use should
be considered for this patient. Carbapenems such as meropenem were
usually used in patients after liver transplant because of their higher
Page 4 of 4
Hepatobiliary
System
Distribution

Anti-infection
Effect

Note: +, ++, +++: the distribution and drug resistance varied from low (+) to high
(+++); the anti-infection effect varied from weak (+) to strong (+++); -: no distribution
Table 1: Comparison between different kinds of antibiotics.

anti-bacterial effectiveness. The patient was prescribed meropenem
as soon as the bacteria were detected. However, the bacterial test
results did not accurately represent the infection. The physician
had to ensure that the antibiotic use was needed to the patient.
Moreover, clinical pharmacist suggested that the pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics and drug resistance conditions should be taken
into consideration. Detailed information was presented in Table 1.
Of all the anti-Klebsiella pneumoniae drugs, only fluoroquinolones
(FQNs) have poor distribution in the hepatobiliary system. Therefore,
FQNs should not be applied in this patient. Although the effectiveness
of carbapenems against infection was higher than cephalosporins
and broad-spectrum penicillins, their lower distribution in the
hepatobiliary system and higher drug resistance somehow limited their
using. Clinical pharmacists suggested alternating use among the three
kinds of antibiotics to avoid resistance. For some antibiotics that were
metabolized by liver (such as cefoperazone), the side effects, especially
liver-related side effects and drug-drug interactions, should be carefully
monitored by clinical pharmacists.
Additional information should be considered to prevent
inflammation, as follows: 1) cleaning the biliary drainage catheter.
The biliary drainage catheter should be flushed twice daily using
normal saline and the bag should also be emptied daily. The dressing
stopcock and the drainage bag should be changed once a week. The
dressing should be changed more frequently if it became loose, wet,
or soiled; and 2) monitoring immunosuppressant. An infection after
liver transplant is often related to lower immunity. Immunosuppressant
monitoring was required for the rest of his life after the transplant.

Clin Exp Pharmacol
ISSN: 2161-1459 CPECR, an open access journal

The therapeutic strategy for patients with recurrent K. pneumonia
infection after liver transplant should be carefully considered. The catheter
should be sterilized according to the protocol, immunosuppressant
should be controlled and managed, and appropriate antibiotics should
be chosen. Anti-K. pneumonia antibiotics should be rotated between
carbapenems, cephalosporins, and broad-spectrum penicillins by
taking the anti-infection effect, drug distribution, and drug resistance
into consideration.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by National High Technology Development
Project (2012AA021003) and the key Projects of Tianjin Health Bureau(12KG103).

References
1. Linares L, Garcia-Goez JF, Cervera C, Almela M, Sanclemente G, et al. (2009)
Early bacteremia after solid organ transplantation. Transplant Proc 41: 2262–
2264.
2. Al-Hasan MN, Razonable RR, Eckel-Passow JE, Baddour LM, (2009)
Incidence rate and outcome of gram-negative bloodstream infection in solid
organ transplant recipients. Am J Transplant 9: 835–843.
3. Singh N, Wagener MM, Obman A, Cacciarelli TV, de Vera ME, et al. (2004)
Bacteremias in liver transplant recipients: shift toward gram-negative bacteria
as predominant pathogens. Liver Transpl 10: 844–849.
4. Meatherall BL, Gregson D, Ross T, Pitout JD, Laupland (2009) KB Incidence,
risk factors, and outcomes of Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteremia. Am J Med
122: 866–873.
5. Bergamasco MD, Barroso Barbosa M, de Oliveira Garcia D, Cipullo R, Moreira
JC et al. (2012) Infection with Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC)producing K. pneumoniae in solid organ transplantation. Transpl Infect Dis 14:
198–205.
6. Lee J, Patel G, Huprikar S, Calfee DP, Jenkins SG (2009) Decreased
Susceptibility to Polymyxin B during Treatment for Carbapenem-Resistant
Klebsiella pneumoniae Infection. J Clin Microbiol 47:1611–1612.
7. Wong MT, Choi SB, Kuan CS, Chua SL, Chang CH, Normi YM, et al. (2012)
Structural Modeling and Biochemical Characterization of Recombinant
KPN_02809, a Zinc-Dependent Metalloprotease from Klebsiella pneumoniae
MGH 78578. Int J Mol Sci 13: 901–917.
8. Castillo-Rojas G, Mazari-Hiríart M, Ponce de León S, Amieva-Fernández
RI, Agis-Juárez RA, et al. (2013) Comparison of Enterococcus faecium and
Enterococcus faecalis Strains Isolated from Water and Clinical Samples:
Antimicrobial Susceptibility and Genetic Relationships. PLoS One 8:e59491.

end
