a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

H O S T E D BY

ScienceDirect
journal homepage: http://ees.elsevier.com/ajps/default.asp

Review

A review on phospholipids and their main
applications in drug delivery systems
Jing Li, Xuling Wang, Ting Zhang, Chunling Wang, Zhenjun Huang,
Xiang Luo, Yihui Deng*
School of Pharmacy, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, No. 103, Wenhua Road, Shenyang 110016, China

article info

abstract

Article history:

Phospholipids have the characteristics of excellent biocompatibility and a especial

Received 27 June 2014

amphiphilicity. These unique properties make phospholipids most appropriate to be

Received in revised form

employed as important pharmaceutical excipients and they have a very wide range of

29 August 2014

applications in drug delivery systems. The aim of this review is to summarize phospho-

Accepted 10 September 2014

lipids and some of their related applications in drug delivery systems, and highlight the

Available online 28 September 2014

relationship between the properties and applications, and the effect of the species of
phospholipids on the efficiency of drug delivery. We refer to some relevant literatures,

Keywords:

starting from the structures, main sources and properties of phospholipids to introduce

Phospholipids

their applications in drug delivery systems. The present article focuses on introducing five

Biocompatibility

types of carriers based on phospholipids, including liposomes, intravenous lipid emul-

Amphiphilicity

sions, micelles, drug-phospholipids complexes and cochleates.

Drug delivery systems

© 2015 Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

Therapeutic agents such as proteins/peptides, nucleic acids,
anticarcinogens, and other drugs have the drawbacks of low
bioavailability, rapid clearance, and high toxicity. Therefore,
there is a great demand to develop delivery methods and
carriers, which will bring a more efficient delivery for
therapeutics.
Drug delivery systems (DDS) are capable of designing to
increase the bioavailability of drugs, control drug delivery and
maintain the drug intact transport to the site of action while

avoiding the non-diseased host tissues. Briefly, in a suitable
dosage and mode of administration, using the smallest dose
to achieve the best therapeutic effect is the research objective
of DDS.
As main components of cellular membrane, phospholipids
have excellent biocompatibility. In addition, phospholipids
are renowned for their amphiphilic structures. The amphiphilicity confers phospholipids with self-assembly, emulsifying and wetting characteristics. When introduced into
aqueous milieu, phospholipids self-assembly generates
different supermolecular structures which are dependent on
their specific properties and conditions. For example,

* Corresponding author. Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, No. 103, Wenhua Road, Shenyang 110016, China. Tel./fax: þ86 24 23986316.
E-mail address: pharmdeng@gmail.com (Y. Deng).
Peer review under responsibility of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajps.2014.09.004
1818-0876/© 2015 Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

82

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

phospholipids have a propensity to form liposomes, which
can be employed as the drug carriers [1]. Phospholipids have
good emulsifying property which can stabilize the emulsions
[2]. In addition, phospholipids as surface-active wetting
agents which can coat on the surface of crystals to enhance
the hydrophility of hydrophobic drugs [3]. The above properties are successfully employed in the DDS design.
Phospholipids based DDS have been found promising for
better and effective delivery of drugs and providing much
appropriate systematic drug delivery. In recent years, a variety
of phospholipid-related formulations, such as Doxil® [4],
Cleviprex® [5], Valium® [6] and Silybin Phytosome™ [7], have
been used in clinic, and achieving good results.
Phospholipids are molecules in which hydrophilic head
group and hydrophobic acyl chains are linked to the alcohol.
The variation in head groups, aliphatic chains and alcohols
leads to the existence of a wide variety of phospholipids. In
addition, the different sources of phospholipids also enhance
the species of phospholipids. Various phospholipids, such as
soybean phosphatidylcholine, egg phosphatidylcholine, or
synthetic phosphatidylcholine, as well as hydrogenated
phosphatidylcholine, are commonly used in different types of
formulations. Phospholipids become intriguing as they can
offer various options. However, the species diversity of phospholipids make how to select an appropriate phospholipid to
achieve the therapeutic purpose become a crucial problem in
the design of DDS, so we summarized the structures, main
sources, properties of phospholipids which can give a guideline in the design of DDS. In addition, we set liposomes,
intravenous lipid emulsions, PC/bile salt mixed micelles,
phospholipid micelles, drug-phospholipid complexes, cochleates as examples to introduce the main applications associated with phospholipids and further explain how to make a
choice among the phospholipids in drug delivery.

2.

Phospholipids

Phospholipids are lipids containing phosphorus, a polar
potion and non-polar potion in their structures.

2.1.

2.1.2.

Sphingomyelins

In 1884, Thudicum first described sphingomyelins (SMs), but it
was not until 1927 that Pick and Bielschowsky proved their
structures to be N-acylsphingosine-1-phosphatidylcholine

Table 1 e Commonly used phospholipids [11].
Phospholipid

Net
charge
in pH 7

PC

0

PE

0

PS

1

PA

1

PI

1

PG

1

CL

2

The structures of phospholipids

According to the alcohols contained in the phospholipids,
they can be divided into glycerophospholipids and
sphingomyelins.

2.1.1.

phosphatidylglycerol (PG) cardiolipin (CL) (Table 1). The length
of the apolar moieties leads to different glycerophospholipids,
e.g. dipalmitoyl, dimyristoyl, distearoyl PC. The saturation of
aliphatic groups characterizes different glycerophospholipids,
such as dioleoyl, distearoyl PC. The type of bonding (ester or
ether) between aliphatic chains and glycerol determines
different glycerophospholipids, such as plasmalogen [9]. The
number of aliphatic chains is different, for example, lysophospholipids have only one acyl group at the glycerol backbone [10] (Fig. 1).

Glycerophospholipids

Glycerophospholipids which are the main phospholipids in
eukaryotic cells, refer to the phospholipids in which glycerol is
the backbone. All naturally occurring glycerophospholipids
possess a-structure and L-configuration [8].
The chemical structures of glycerophospholipids can be
classified by the head group, the length and the saturation of
hydrophobic side chains, the type of bonding between the
aliphatic moieties and glycerol backbone, and the number of
aliphatic chains. Variation in the head group leads to
different glycerophospholipids, such as phosphatidylcholine
(PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylserine (PS),
phosphatidic
acid
(PA),
phosphatidylinositol
(PI),

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

83

Fig. 1 e Schematic representation of the structures of phospholipids.

(Fig. 1). In 1962, Shapiro and Flowers confirmed that all SMs of
biological sources are D-erythro configuration [12].
SMs are an important component of animal cell membranes. Although PC and SM are very similar in molecular
structure, they still have some differences. 1) The backbone of
SM is a sphingosine, while the backbone of PC is a glycerol. 2)
Each SM molecule averagely contains 0.1e0.35 cis-double
bonds in amide-linked acyl chains, and PC contains 1.1e1.5
cis-double bonds. It is obvious that the saturation of hydrophobic regions of SMs is higher than that of PCs. 3) The typical
acyl lengths of the naturally occurring SMs are usually more
than 20, while the paraffin residues of sphingosine are relatively shorter, so the SMs are asymmetric molecules [13]; in
contrast, PCs typically contain moderate lengths (16e18) of
the acyl chains, and the lengths of two chains are approximately equal, so the PCs are symmetric molecules [14]. 4) SMs
are capable of forming intermolecular and intramolecular
hydrogen bonds, so the SM and PC bilayer have a significant
difference in the macroscopic properties [13]. 5) The range of
phase transition temperature (Tc) of all naturally occurring
SMs is 30e45  C which is above the natural PCs [13]. 6)

Numerous observations have shown that SM and cholesterol
have a very strong interaction, for example, compared with
the non-saturated PC/cholesterol bilayer, SM/cholesterol
bilayer has higher compressibility, and lower permeability to
water. The reason for this phenomenon is that higher saturation of the acyl chain of SM leads to stronger interaction
with steroid nucleus [13].

2.2.

The main sources of phospholipids

According to the sources, phospholipids can be divided into
natural phospholipids and synthetic phospholipids.

2.2.1.

Natural phospholipids

In 1793, Fourcroy was likely to be the first to find the existence
evidence of complex aliphatic compounds. In 1812, Uauquelin
found phospholipids in human brain. In 1846, Gobley separated phospholipids from egg yolk. The term “lecithin” which
is derived from the Greek lekithos was first used to describe a
sticky orange material isolated from egg yolk. After 20 years,
choline component in lecithin was determined [15]. Currently,

84

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

there are three definitions of “lecithin” appeared in literatures,
including: 1) from a business perspective, “lecithin” mainly
includes PC, PE, PS, PI, other phospholipids, triglycerides, fatty
acids and carbohydrates; 2) from a historical point of view,
“lecithin” refers to the lipids containing phosphorus isolated
from eggs and brains; 3) from a scientific point of view, “lecithin” refers to PCs [16].
Phospholipids are widely distributed in animals and plants,
and the main sources include vegetable oils (e.g. soybean, cotton seed, corn, sunflower and rapeseed) and animal tissues (e.g.
egg yolk and bovine brain). In terms of production, egg yolk and
soybean are the most important sources for phospholipids [17].
However, soybean and egg yolk have differences in the contents
and species of phospholipids, mainly including: 1) egg yolk
lecithin contains a higher amounts of PC; 2) phospholipids in
egg yolk exist long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids of n-6 and
n-3 series, primarily arachidonic acid (AA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), which are absent in soybean lecithins; 3) animal lecithins have characteristic of the presence of SM [18]; 4)
the saturation level of egg yolk lecithins is higher than that of
soybean lecithins [19], so their oxidative stability is better than
that of soybean lecithins; 5) for egg yolk phospholipids, saturated fatty acid is usually at sn-1 position, and unsaturated fatty
acid is at sn-2 position [9], while for soybean lecithin, sn-1 and
sn-2 position can be both unsaturated fatty acids. For example,
dilinoleoylphosphatidylcholine (DLPC) is the main component
of soybean phosphatidylcholine (SPC) [20].
The cost of phospholipids isolated from natural sources is
always lower than that obtained by synthetic or semisynthetic methods. For natural phospholipids, the more
pure they are, the higher the price is [9].
Phospholipids isolated from plants and animals can be
purified into different levels, including food and pharmaceutical grade. For example, lipoid E80 can contain PC, PE, lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), lysophosphatidylethanolamine
(LPE), SM and trace amounts of triglycerides, cholesterol, fatty
acid, d, L-a-vitamin E and water [21].

2.2.2.

Synthetic phospholipids

Since chromatographic purification techniques still cannot
get single component of naturally occurring phospholipids,
researchers focus on chemical synthesis which can obtain
single component with defined structure and configuration
[22]. The synthesis of phospholipids can be divided into semisynthesis and total synthesis.
Semi-synthesis of glycerophospholipids refers to the
changing of head, tail groups or both on the basis of natural
phospholipids. Therefore, compared with the total synthesis,
it requires less reaction steps. The semi-synthetic methods of
glycerophospholipids mainly include: 1) the double bonds of
natural phospholipids are hydrogenated to obtain the saturated phospholipids which have a higher melting point and
oxidation
stability;
2)
Acylation
of
sn-glycero-3phosphocholine (GPC) obtained by deacylation of natural PC
with activated acyl derivative can get the desired PC; 3)
phospholipase D catalyzes glycerophospholipids to generate
the phosphatidic acid (PA), and the hydroxy-containing acceptors such as glycerol and serine can attach to PA, which
can converse the choline head group into various phosphorylated alcohol head groups [9].

The total synthesis of glycerophospholipids involves the
formation of ester or ether bonds linking apolar moieties to
glycerol backbone, and the attachement of polar head group.
Ispropylidene glycerols or sugar alcohols, such as D-mannitol,
are often served as the precursors of glycerol part of phospholipids, which are available from many sources. The synthetic glycerophospholipids have the advantages of single
component and stable property [9].
The procedure of semi-synthesis of SM involves the
deacylation of the natural SM extracts (primarily from bovine
brains) to obtain the sphingosylphospocholine which is subsequently acylated to SM using the fatty acid of choice. It has
been found that during the deacylation-reacylation procedure, a significant amount of the L-threo stereoisomer is
formed. Thus, the final product represents a mixture of
D-erythro and L-threo stereoiomers [23].
Because the total synthesis of SM is considerably more
complex than that of the glycerophospholipids, there is few
studies on the fully synthetic and stereochemically pure SM
[23].The access to synthetic SM is limited by the availability of
synthetic sphingosine. Following the total synthesis of
sphingosine [24], the first synthetic SM was synthesized by
Shapiro et al [25]. The complete synthesis of SM includes the
following steps: 1) the synthesis of sphingosine, 2) the synthesis of ceramide (N-acylsphingosine), 3) the synthesis of SM.

2.3.

The physiological properties of phospholipids

Phospholipids are basic substances to maintain life activity.
They are widely distributed in humans, animals, plants, and
so on. Phospholipids are indispensable components of all
cellular and sub-cellular membranes, they can arrange as
bilayer membranes. In addition to assembling the membrane,
phospholipids are also used to assemble the circulating lipoproteins, the main task of which is to transport lipophilic triglycerides and cholesterols through the hydrophilic blood.
The human body uses phospholipids as emulsifiers. Together
with cholesterols and bile acids, they form mixed micelles in
the gallbladder to promote the absorption of fat-soluble substances. The human body also uses phospholipids as the
surface-active wetting agents in the pleura and alveoli of lung,
pericardium, joints, etc [26].
Different kinds of phospholipids have some general properties, but they also own their unique physiological functions
(Table 2).

2.4.

The physical properties of phospholipids

2.4.1.

Phospholipid polymorphisms in water

Phospholipids in water can form many kinds of assemblies,
such as micelles, liposomes and hexagonal (HII) phase, which
is attributed to the molecular shapes of the phospholipids.
The assemblies and molecular shapes of different phospholipids in water are summarized in Table 3 [1]. Understanding
the lipid polymorphisms is necessary for establishing a stable
carrier and triggered release lipid-based delivery system.

2.4.2.

Factors modulating lipid polymorphisms

Non-bilayer lipids such as unsaturated PE can be stabilized in
a bilayer structure by the presence of bilayer preferring lipids

85

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

Table 2 e Physiological properties of the major phospholipids.
Phospholipids
PC
PE
PS

PI
CL

SM

Physiological properties
a. An important substrate of synthesis of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, and having the function of nourishing
the brain and improving intelligence [27].
a. Playing an important role in membrane fusion [28].
a. Improving function of nerve cells, regulating the conduction of nerve impulse, and enhancing the memory
function of brain [29].
b. The common feature of apoptosis [30].
c. The main acidic phospholipids of membranes of platelets, and involved in the clotting process [31].
a. The precursor of second messenger, which plays a very important role in the process of transmission of messages
in neural system [32].
a. A phospholipid of unusual structure is localized almost exclusively to inner mitochondrial membrane, is particularly
rich in unsaturated fatty acids. This phospholipid plays an important role in mitochondrial bioenergetics by affecting the
activity of key proteins of mitochondrial inner membrane [33].
a. Along with cholesterol, constituting the key components of the stable, detergent-resistant nanodomains in
membranes, called functional lipid rafts which have been identified as the important membrane structure of signal
transduction, protein transport and sorting of membrane components [34].

such as PS. It is usually found that between 20 and 50 mol% of
the bilayer preferring lipids are required to maintain a net
bilayer organization when mixed with HII preferring lipids
such as PE. The structural preferences of these pure and
mixed lipid systems can be modulated by a wide variety of
factors, such as head group size temperature, hydrocarbon
unsaturation, ionic strength, pH, the incorporation of inverted
cone molecules and the presence of divalent cations such as
Ca2þ [35].

(1) The smaller head group of PE (as compared to PC) is
consistent with HII organization. In addition, in the case
of PE, increasing acyl chain unsaturation, temperature
and acyl chain length lead to increased cone shape and
possible HII phase formation [35]. The lamellar to HII
transition temperature (Tbh) decreases with the
increasing chain length and the increasing unsaturation of acyl chain of PE. Many species of naturally
occurring PE preferentially adopt a HII phase at

Table 3 e Polymorphic phases and corresponding dynamic molecular shapes of component phospholipids.
Phospholipid

Phase

Molecular shape

Micellar

Inverted cone

Bilayer

Cylinder

Lysophospholipids

PC
SM
PS
PG
PI
PA
CL

PE (unsaturated)
PA-Ca2þ
PA (pH < 3)
PS (pH < 3)
CL-Ca2þ

Hexagonal (HII)

Cone

86

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

physiological temperatures. In terms of Tbh for various
synthetic and naturally derived PE, the readers can refer
to Tilcock's review [36].
(2) The hydration of the head group can modulate the
polymorphisms. For PE, decreasing the water content or
increasing the ionic strength leads to increased
proclivity for HII structure. In addition, under the condition of high salt concentration, unsaturated PG, CL
and PA can adopt HII phase [36].
(3) In the case of pure lipid systems, for example, protonation of the PS carboxyl and PA phosphate at low pH
values leads to HII structure [37,38]. Similar observations
extend to mixed lipid systems, where bilayer-HII transitions are observed for PS-PE and PA-PE systems as the
pH is reduced below 5 as such pH values convert the PA
and PS to HII preferring lipid species [39].
(4) Conventional liposomes as drug carriers are avidly
taken up by the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS),
so in order to increase the circulation time of liposomes
in vivo, researchers focus on studying the longcirculating liposomes. The study for a synthetic lipid
that can extend circulation times finally gives rise to the
development of polymer grafted bilayers. Several polymer lipids lead to prolonged circulation times, but the
most well studied are those consisting of polyethyleneglycol (PEG) grafted onto PE (Fig. 2) [40]. For
instance, DSPE-PEG2000 is a PEGylated phospholipid
which is widely applied in various preparations, and
PEG layer usually serves as a steric barrier to stabilize
the molecule assemblies among them. Nanostructures
based on DSPE-PEG2000 play an important role in DDS.
For instance, DSPE-PEG2000 is used in the FDA approved
drug product Doxil® [4].
However, the concentration of PE-PEG derivatives can
affect the structures and properties of liposomes. For
phospholipid-PEG conjugates, the larger the size of the
attached PEG is, the more wedge-shaped the phospholipidPEG is. Thus, the cone shaped phospholipid-PEG2000 and
phospholipid-PEG5000 molecules form micelles in solution and
they can convert DSPC bilayer to micelles at high
phospholipid-PEG concentrations. In contrast, phospholipidPEG350 is able to separate PC head groups enough to cause
interdigitation at high concentrations, but not enough to
cause micelles formation even in dispersions containing pure
phospholipid-PEG350. Phospholipid-PEG750 has an intermediate shape, so that when added to DSPC, it induces interdigitated bilayers at moderate concentrations and mixed micelles
at higher concentrations [41].
The experimental results of Johnsson et al. showed that the
structural evolution of aggregates formed in this system with

increasing phospholipid-PEG (PEG molecular weight 2000 or
5000)
concentration
can
be
summarized
as:
liposomes / discoidal micelles / spherical micelles [42].
Unlike DPPC and DSPC, the mixtures of EPC and phospholipidPEG form cylindrical micelles rather than discoidal micelles
[43]. Moreover, the addition of phospholipid-PEG to DOPE is
able to facilitate liposomes formation at physiological conditions (Fig. 3). The observations of Johnsson et al. showed that
in order to obtain a dispersed phase consisting of only liposomes (predominantly unilamellar), 8 mol% phospholipidPEG2000 and greater than 10 mol% of phospholipid-PEG750 must
be added to the DOPE system at physiological conditions.
When the concentration of phospholipid-PEG beyond bilayer
saturating concentration, small disks and spherical micelles
formed [44].
When the concentration of PE-PEG derivatives exceeds
10 mol%, a large portion of discoidal or cylindrical micelles
structures formed which have no effect on the delivery for
water-soluble drugs. To reach the target site, liposomes must
not only possess a long circulation time, but also maintain the
encapsulated drugs. Therefore, these two factors must be
taken into consideration to choose the most appropriate
concentration of PE-PEG derivatives [40].
(5) In 1974, Verkleij et al. [45] observed cylindrical lipid
structures using dilauryl phosphatidylglycerol with the
addition of Ca2þ by freeze-etch electron microscopy. The
structure were also observed in the presence of Mg2þ [46].
In 1975, Papahadjopoulos et al. [47] observed the fusion
of small unilamellar PS liposomes in the presence of Ca2þ
by negative staining electron microscopy and they
observed the fusion of sonicated PS vesicles with Ca2þ to
form rolled-up cylindrical structures which were named
as cochleate cylinders by freeze-fracture electron microscopy [48]. Negatively charged phospholipids, such as
PA, PS, PG and PI, can serve as the main building blocks of
cochleates. In addition, mixture the negatively phospholipids with other phospholipids can also form cochleates, for example, vesicles prepared from PS/PC
(PS > 50%) in the presence of Ca2þ can form cochleates,
which needs higher threshold concentration of Ca2þ
[47,49]. For cochleates, the molar ratio of divalent cations
and phospholipids is 1:2. Ca2þ maintains the cochleate in
its rolled form, and bridges each successive layer
through ionic interaction [48] (Fig. 4). Moreover,
removing the calcium by chelation with EDTA leads to
the cochleates unrolling and spontaneously forming
large single-bilayer vesicles [48] (Fig. 5).
In the case of pure lipid systems, for PS, Ca2þ induces
crystalline cochleate structure, whereas CL can adopt HII

Fig. 2 e Schematic representation of the structure of DSPE-PEG.

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

87

Fig. 3 e Cone shaped (HII phase) phospholipids and inverted cone shaped (micelle) lipids have complementarity effects in
shape. When they are mixed, bilayer structure can be exhibited.

phase in the presence of Ca2þ [50]. And for other acidic
phospholipids such as PA, PG and PI, their structures on hydration may be sensitive to the fatty acid composition, for
example, “cochleate” structure can be observed for saturated
species in the presence of Ca2þ, however, unsaturated PA
adopt HII phase [51], and unsaturated PG and PI still prefer a
bilayer organization by the addition of Ca2þ [52,53].
In the case of mixed systems, it has been proved that
mixtures of acidic phospholipids (such as PS, CL, PA and PG)
with unsaturated (HII phase) PE are sensitive to the presence of
Ca2þ (and in some cases Mg2þ) which can trigger bilayer to HII
phase transitions. In systems stabilized by CL and PA, Ca2þ
can convert the CL and PA to HII preferring species, thus
allowing the entire mixture to adopt the HII phase. This contrasts with systems stabilized by PS, where Ca2þ segregates
the PS into “cochleate” domains, allowing the PE to revert to
the HII phase it prefers in isolation. Alternatively, in PE systems stabilized by up to 30 mol% (unsaturated) PG, Ca2þ appears to reduce the bilayer stabilizing capacity of PG and both
PG and PE enter the HII configuration. However, the behavior
of systems stabilized by PI suggests that none of these
mechanisms apply. Nayar et al. suggested that to a limited
extent Ca2þ is able to segregate PI in these mixed systems,
where the PI-Ca2þ aggregates remain in a hydrated lamellar

structure [53]. An inability of Ca2þ to induce a cochleate
structure for PG [52], PI [53] and PA [51] may arise in part from
the relatively unsaturated nature of the acyl chains.

2.4.3.

The phase transition temperature of phospholipids

The Tc of phospholipids is a temperature at which phospholipids transit from gel to liquid crystalline state. Many factors
affect the Tc. 1) The nature of the polar head group. PC and PG
with the same hydrocarbon chains have similar Tc, but the
corresponding PE has a higher Tc. For example, the Tc of DPPC
and DPPG are both 41  C, whereas DPPE is 63  C, which is
attributed to a stronger head group interaction. 2) The length
of the hydrocarbon chains. Phospholipids with longer hydrocarbon chains have a higher Tc than those with shorter ones.
For example, the Tc of DSPC is 55  C, and yet DPPC is 41  C. 3)
The degree of saturation of the hydrocarbon chains. For
phospholipids with the same head group and length of
aliphatic chain, high saturation in the hydrocarbon chains
increases the Tc. For example, the Tc of DSPC is 55  C, whereas
DOPC is 20  C. 4) Purity. The low purity of phospholipids
widen the range of Tc. Naturally occurring phospholipids are
usually mixtures of components having different length hydrocarbon chains. Such mixtures would usually be expected
to produce broad ill defined transitions, but the synthetic

Fig. 4 e (A) Schematic representation of the structure of cochleate. (B) Lipid bilayer architecture in a cochleate formed by the
negatively charged phospholipids and Ca2þ.

88

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

Fig. 5 e Schematic representation of the structure of (A) small unilamellar vesicles, (B) cochleate and (C) large unilamellar
vesicle. Small unilamellar vesicles prepared by negatively charged phospholipids can form cochleate cylinder in the
presence of Ca2þ. When adding the EDTA which is chelating agents of metal ions, the cochleate can change into large
unilamellar vesicle.

phospholipids usually have definite Tc. For example, the Tc of
SPC is 20 to 30  C, whereas DLPC is 20  C [54]. Table 4
summarizes the Tc of commonly used phospholipids.
When chosing the phospholipids as carrier materials,
many factors must be taken into comprehensive consideration to select a kind of phospholipid with appropriate Tc.

3.
The applications of phospholipids in drug
delivery systems
3.1.

Liposomes

3.1.1.

The development of liposomal drug delivery system

Liposomes are vesicles prepared with phospholipids as the
main substance, the structure of which is similar to cellular

Table 4 e Phase transition temperature of commonly
used phospholipids [54e57].
Phospholipids
Soybean phosphatidylcholine
Hydrogenated soybean
phosphatidylcholine
Egg sphingomyelin
Egg phosphatidylcholine
Dimyristoyl phosphatidylcholine
Dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine
Dioleoyl phosphatidylcholine
Distearoyl phosphatidylcholine
Dimyristoyl phosphatidylglycerol
Dipalmitoyl phosphatidylglycerol
Dioleoyl phosphatidylglycerol
Distearoyl phosphatidylglycerol
Dimyristoyl
phosphatidylethanolamine
Dipalmitoyl
phosphatidylethanolamine
Dioleoyl
phosphatidylethanolamine
Dimyristoyl phosphatidylserine
Dipalmitoyl phosphatidylserine
Dioleoyl phosphatidylserine



Abbreviation

Tc ( C)

SPC
HSPC

20 to 30
52

ESM
EPC
DMPC
DPPC
DOPC
DSPC
DMPG
DPPG
DOPG
DSPG
DMPE

Ca. 40
5 to 15
23
41
22
55
23
41
18
55
50

DPPE

60

DOPE

16

DMPS
DPPS
DOPS

38
51
10

membrane. Liposomes origined from multilaminar vesicles
which were clearly taken on morphosis by electron microscope images observed by Bangham and Horne in 1964 [58]. In
1965, Bangham et al. reported biomembrane model system
which was established based on vesicle structures and had
ion gradient [59]. In 1971, Gregoriadis et al. first used liposomes to deliver bioactive substances [60]. After that, liposomes in drug delivery field flourish. In 1990, the first
injectable liposomal drug-amphotericin B liposome (AmBisome®) was available in Europe [61]. In 1995, the first liposomal anticancer drug (Doxil®) which is also the first FDA
approved nanomedicine was on the market in the USA [4].
Liposomes as carriers of therapeutic drugs have attracted
attention more than 40 years. As a DDS, liposomes have many
advantages as follows: delivering both hydrophilic and lipophilic drugs (Fig. 6), possessing targeting, controlled release
properties, cell affinity, tissue compatibility, reducing drug
toxicity and improving drug stability. During the researches,
the conventional structures of the liposomes have some
changes, which have brought out a series of new type liposomes, such as long-circulating liposomes, stimuli-responsive
liposomes, cationic liposomes and ligand-targeted liposomes.
Liposomes can serve as the carriers of antitumor drugs, antifungal drugs, analgesic drugs, gene therapeutics and vaccines,
and there have been some liposomal formulations industrialized which are listed in Table 5.

Fig. 6 e Schematic representation of liposome.

89

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

3.1.2. Considering a variety of factors to select the
appropriate phospholipid to prepare liposomes
(1) Synthetic and natural phospholipids have both advantages and disadvantages. The advantages of synthetic
phospholipids are that the property is relatively stable,
and purity is relatively high; the drawback is that the
price is relatively high. However, the advantage of natural phospholipids is that the price is relatively low; the
disadvantages are that the purity is difficult to control,
and the nature is relatively unstable which can be
metabolized to lysophospholipids in the process of
usage and storage. So the source should be considered
when choosing natural phospholipids to prepare the
liposomes. For example, the content of unsaturated
fatty acids in soybean phospholipids is higher than that
in egg yolk phospholipids. Therefore, it is difficult to
obtain quality controlled liposomes product using soybean lecithins [63]. In addition, Wang et al. studied the
relationship between drug carrying ability of liposomes
and PCs. The results showed that the encapsulation
efficiency of EPC liposomes was higher than that of SPC
liposomes, and the leakage rate was lower than that of
SPC liposomes, so EPC liposomes had better drug carrying ability [64].
Based on the above advantages of EPC, the current listing
liposomes prepared by natural phospholipids are substantially composed of EPC (Table 5).
(2) pH-sensitive liposomes. In order to make the drugs
escape from being degradated into inactive compounds
by enzymes in lysosomes after endocytosis, usually pHsensitive liposomes are prepared. DOPE is usually
selected to prepare pH-sensitive liposomes, however,
which is found to suffer from their difficulty to form liposomes by themselves. So in order to form stable liposomes, materials containing titratable acidic groups
must be added to DOPE. The liposomes established by
the above membrane materials have pH-sensitivity,
because at neutral pH, the fatty acid carboxyl ion can
provide effective electrostatic repulsion, which makes

the liposomes stable at lamellar phase, and at acidic pH,
fatty acid carboxyl groups are protonated, causing the
formation of the HII phase, which makes the liposomes
unstable and easy to aggregate, fuse and release the
contents [65]. In addition, compared with other phospholipids, liposomes formed by PE contribute to the
membrane fusion, which is because of the low hydration
of the polar head of PE [66]. Thus, the presence of DOPE
can increase the hydrophobicity of liposomal membrane, and promote its interaction with the lipid bilayer.
To increase the stability of pH-sensitive liposomes, the
structures have undergone a series of changes, including:
long-circulating DOPE-containing pH-sensitive liposomes and
association of pH-sensitive polymers with liposomes. Adding
DSPE-PEG to DOPE liposomes is not only able to promote the
formation of DOPE liposomes, but also can increase the circulation time of liposomes in vivo [44]. Another method for
conferring the liposomes with pH-sensitivity is to anchor the
pH-sensitive polymers to liposomes. The principle is beyound
the scope of this review.
(3) Thermosensitive liposomes (temperature-sensitive
liposomes) are very promising strategies for cancer
treatment, which effectively utilize the dual advantages
of liposomes and hyperthermia to improve the therapeutic effects and reduce toxicity.
In 1978, Yatvin et al. were the first to realize the therapeutic
potential of liposomes which are composed of phospholipids
that can be achieved Tc (higher than the physiological temperature, but below 42  C) by gentle heating [67]. Liposomes
have a characteristic Tc, at which the liposome membranes
transit from the gel phase to liquid crystalline phase, and the
encapsulated drugs are released from the vesicles [67].
The early thermosensitive liposomes are mainly based on
DPPC (Tc ¼ 41  C). Although pure DPPC liposomes can increase
drug release, the amount and rate of release are relatively low.
Adding other phospholipids (mainly DSPC and HSPC) to DPPC
would have a positive impact on the amount and rate of drug
release [68]. However, the Tc of liposomes composed of DPPC/
DSPC are enhanced. Furthermore, DSPC added increases the

Table 5 e Approved liposomal formulations [4,62].
Product

Phospholipids

Drug

Ambisome®

HSPC and DSPG

Amphotericin B

Doxil®

HSPC and DSPE-PEG2000

Doxorubicin

DaunoXome®

DSPC

Daunorubicin

Myocet™
DepoDur™
DepoCyt®

EPC
DOPC and DPPG
DOPC and DPPG

Lipo-Dox®
Marqibo®

DSPC and DSPE-PEG2000
ESM

Doxorubicin
Morphine sulfate
Cytosine
Arabinoside
Doxorubicin
Vincristine

Year approved
1990 (Europe)
1997 (USA), 2000
1995
1999
2003
(Europe, Canada) 2007
1996 (Europe)
1996 (USA)
2000 (Europe)
2004
1999
2001 (Taiwan)
2012 (USA)

90

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

span of Tc. As a result, only 43e45  C can trigger the release of
drugs, but this range can make normal tissue surrounding the
tumor at the risk of necrosis. Therefore, it is necessary to find
a way that gentle heating (39e42  C) can promote the release
of drugs, and simultaneously keep burst relase [68].
In 1999, Anyarambhatla and Needham proposed that
incorporating 10 mol% lysolipid monopalmitoyl phosphocholine (MPPS) into the PEGylated conventional thermosensitive liposomes composed of DPPC could make the Tc
reduce from 43  C to 39e40  C, and enhance the release of
drugs upon heating (approximately 50% of drugs will be
released at 40  C for 20 s) (Fig. 7) [69]. ThermoDox® is a
lysophospholipid-containing
thermosensitive
liposome,
which is developed by Celsion company. Unfortunately, the
combination of ThermoDox® and radiofrequency thermal
ablation (RFA) did not significantly improve the therapeutic
effects in third period clinical trials. There are many reasons
for the failure, one of which is that drugs loading in ThermoDox® are easy to leak, leading to the loss of drugs before
reaching the target site. Another important reason is that
most drugs do not reach the target site, causing failure to
generate substantial trigger release. Therefore, in order to
achieve the desired effect, the lipid composition should be
further changed [70].
Another method for preparing thermosensitive liposomes
is to incorporate heat-sensitive polymers in liposomes. The
temperature sensitivity of such liposomes are mainly dependent on the temperature-sensitive polymers. Moreover, DPPC
incorporated to the thermal thermosensitive liposomes can
achieve a synergistic effect with the polymers [71].
(4) The types of phospholipids can also affect the delivery
efficiency of drugs.
There is evidence that the composition of liposomes
markedly contributes to their ability to escape recognition by
the MPS. Liposomes that resemble the exterior layer of
erythrocytes in composition are particularly resistant to
clearance [72]. In erythrocytes, PC and SM are mainly in the
exterior layer, whereas the PE and PS are restricted to the
interior layer [73]. Moreover, the fatty acyl chains of phospholipids in the outer layer are more highly saturated than

that in the interior layer [74]. Evidence showed that the loss of
phospholipid asymmetry of erythrocytes might be translated
into a signal of recognition by macrophages. This result not
only provides a guideline for understanding the behavior of
liposomes in vivo, but also provides a reference for the design
of liposome DDS.
It has been observed that liposomes containing negatively
charged phospholipids such as PS, PG and PA, can be quickly
eliminated from the circulation system and focused on the
MPS [72]. In contrast, liposomes containing negatively charged
ganglioside (GM1) and PI are able to inhibit the uptake by the
MPS and prolong the circulating time [75]. Therefore, clearance rate can not be fully explained by negative charge. Allen
[76] proposed that the hydrophilicity on the surface can play a
very important role in phagocytosis of particles.
In addition, membrane fluidity can also affect the circulation time of the liposomes. Increasing the rigidity of liposomes
by incorporating phospholipids with high Tc (e.g. DSPC) and
more rigid phospholipids like SM can reduce their clearance
by the MPS [75]. Adding SM in liposomal formulation can not
only decrease the distribution of liposomes to the MPS [77],
but also stabilize the membrane structure [78]. The fatty chain
is connected to the skeleton via an amide bond in SM molecule, while in the glycerophospholipids, the aliphatic chains
are connected to the skeleton of the molecule via an ester
bond. In vivo, the amide bond is difficult to be hydrolyzed and
degraded by enzymes than the ester bond, so an amide bond is
more stable than an ester bond. Furthermore, SM can form
intermolecular hydrogen bonds, so it also has the effect of
solidifying the bilayer [79]. The successful application of liposomes prepared by SM is Marqibo® [4].
Therefore, we can select the phospholipids to prepare liposomes according to the site of disease. When the sites of
diseases are in the MPS, the majority of liposomes need to be
removed from the blood circulation within minutes to exert
therapeutic effects. So in order to make drugs target to the
MPS, conventional liposomes (i.e. liposomes composed of
various phospholipids and cholesterol and possibly other
lipids, without specific components conferring the property of
long circulation in blood) can be prepared. However, the rapid
elimination of liposomes has thus far been an obstacle for
transporting drugs to the sites of diseases beyond the MPS,
such as some tumors. So in order to enhance the circulation
time, long circulation liposomes can be prepared [80].
(5) Accelerated blood clearace phenomenon.

Fig. 7 e Schematic of the lysolipid-containing
thermosensitive liposome.

When PEGylated liposomes are repeatedly injected into the
same animal, the second dose of liposomes would rapidly be
cleared from the bloodstream and accumulated in liver and
spleen, and this phenomenon is called “accelerated blood
clearance (ABC)”. There are many factors known to influence
ABC phenomenon, in this review, we mainly focus on the effects of types and dose of phospholipids. 1) The effect of the
dose of phospholipids on the ABC phenomenon is different
with the variation of phospholipids types, for example, when
the first phospholipids dose of PEGylated liposomes composed
of hydrogenated egg phosphatidylcholine (HEPC) is larger than
1 mmol/kg in rats, the second injection of PEGylated liposomes
cannot induce the ABC phenomenon [81]; however, when

91

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

liposomes are composed of partially hydrogenated egg phosphatidylcholine (PHEPC), intravenous injection of different
phospholipids doses of PEGylated liposomes (i.e. 0.05, 0.5 or
5 mmol/kg) as a first dose can cause the second specific dose
(5 mmol/kg) of injected PEGylated liposomes to induce the ABC
phenomenon [82]. In addition, the magnitude of ABC phenomenon is different when lipsomes composed of the same
phospholipid, which could be reduced by the increasing of
phospholipids dose [81,82]. 2) Phospholipids can also affect the
magnitude of ABC phenomenon. Xu et al. demonstrated that
ABC phenomenon of liposomes prepared by unsaturated
phospholipids (SPC, EPC and ESM) was more obvious than that
of saturated phospholipids (DPPC and HSPC) [83].
In addition, Depth study showed that PEG is not necessary
for the generaion of ABC phenomenon for liposomes. Laverman et al. [82] demonstrated that conventional liposomes can
also accelerate blood clearance of the second injection of
conventional or PEGylated liposomes. Unlike PEGylated liposomes, the results of Ishida et al. showed that a high dose
(5 mmol/kg) of conventional liposomes (without a PEG-coating)
can induce the same phenomenon, while a low lipid dose
(0.001 mmol/kg) did not [81].

3.2.

Intravenous lipid emulsions

Intravenous emulsions are originated from the development
of intravenous nutrition emulsions. In 1962, Intralipid was
successfully developed in Sweden and proved to be safe and
effective, which lay the foundation for the development of
medicinal intravenous emulsions [84]. Intravenous fat emulsions possess many advantages, including targeting, reducing
drug toxicity, which make them attract more and more attentions recently.
Phospholipids as zwitterionic surfactants can be used as
emulsifying agent of O/W type emulsions, and due to their
biological and non-toxic characteristics, they can be used as
emulsifiers for intravenous injection [2]. The O/W type emulsions are mainly composed of two parts: the oil core and the
emulsifying agents on the surface. Unlike liposomes, fat
emulsions are suitable for large-scale industrial production
and relatively stable below 25  C for long term. More

importantly, a large quantity of lipophilic drugs can be dissolved in the hydrophobic core of emulsions [85].
Currently, the listed drug containing injectable emulsions
using phospholipids as an emulsifier are summarized in
Table 6 [5]. The main disadvantage of phospholipids as
emulsifiers is that in the process of emulsification, sterilization and storage, natural lecithins are readily hydrolyzed to
generate lysophospholipids which can lead to hemolysis after
intravenous injection. Phospholipid mixtures derived from
the egg yolk of birds and soybean have stronger emulsifying
ability than single component. However, using purified lecithins [86] can reduce the generation of lysophospholipids. The
physical nature of lecithins and the resulting emulsion stability are changing a lot, depending on the sources and the
degrees of purification of the emulsifiers.
The component of PC determines the surface properties of
fat emulsions, and also affects their distribution in the body.
Lenzo et al. studied the in vivo behavior of emulsions using
EPC, DOPC, DMPC, DPPC, and 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl phosphatidylcholine (POPC) as an emulsifier. In that study, emulsions
were prepared in the size of about 150 nm, and the elimination rate in rat plasma mainly depended on the types of
phospholipids. When these emulsions were injected into the
blood of conscious rats, the elimination rate of formulations
using DPPC as an emulsifier was the slowest. The fat emulsions stabilized by EPC and POPC were metabolized similarly
to natural chylomicrons. The triacylglycerols were rapidly
hydrolyzed by lipoprotein lipase (LPL), followed by the remnants derived from the emulsions was taken up by liver.
Phospholipids from the injected emulsions were removed
more slowly and became associated with the high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) fractions of the plasma. Emulsions containing DPPC were metabolized differently. The triacylglycerols were eliminated very slowly from plasma,
which indicated that LPL hydrolysis did not occur and
phospholipids were not transferred to the HDL. For the
emulsions containing DMPC, the triacylglycerols and
cholesterol esters of emulsion were eliminated very fast, but
phospholipids were not transferred to the HDL. For DOPC
emulsions, clearances were slower than EPC and POPC
emulsions, but it was effectively transferred to the HDL [87].

Table 6 e Representative list of currently marketed drug containing injectable emulsions.
Product
Cleviprex®
Diazemuls®
Diazepam-Lipuro®
Diprivan®
Etomidat-Lipuro®
Fluosol-DA®
Liple®
Limethason®
Lipo-NSAID®
Stesolid®
Vitalipid®

Drug

Market

Emusifier

Clevidipine Butyrate
Diazepam
Diazepam
Propofol
Etomidate
Perfluorodecalin
Perflurotripropylamine
Alprostadil (PGE1)
Dexamethasone Palmitate
Flurbiprofen axetil
Diazepam
Vitamins A, D2, E, K1

USA
Europe, Canada, Australia
Europe, Canada, Australia
Worldwide
Germany
Worldwide

EP
EP
EL
EL
EL
EP and pluronic F68

Japan
Japan, Germany
Japan
Europe
Europe

EP
EL
EL
EP
EL

EL: egg lecithin EP: egg phospholipid.

92

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

Redgrave et al. showed that the clearances of DSPC-stabilized
fat emulsions from the plasma were faster than the DPPCstabilized fat emulsions. Although DSPC fat emulsions can
hardly be hydrolyzed by LPL, it can be avidly taken up by the
macrophages in liver and spleen, which is different from the
liposomes prepared by DSPC [88].
SM is a very important component of lipoproteins surface,
and the surface concentration of SM plays an important role in
metabolism and distribution of emulsions. Redgrave et al. [88]
observed that adding SM to emulsions caused the prolongation of circulation time in plasma and the reduction of uptake
by liver, which are attributed to the decrease of binding of
apolipoprotein E and the reduction of LPL-mediated lipolysis
induced by SM.
Recently, in order to increase the circulation time of
intravenous emulsions (Fig. 8A) and enhance the antitumor
effect of drugs, PEGylated derivatives as emulsifiers are usually added to prepare long-circulating emulsions (Fig. 8B).
These effects of PEG derivatives can be attributed to the increase of hydrophilicity and steric stability of the emulsion
surface [80]. However, repeated injections of PEGylated
emulsions can also induce the ABC phenomenon [89], and the
factors related to phospholipids affecting it still need in-depth
study.

3.3.

Micelles

The applications of phospholipids in micelle systems mainly
include PC/Bile salt mixed micelles and phospholipid micelles.

3.3.1.

PC/bile salt mixed micelles

In classical mixed micelles (MMs), water-insoluble phospholipid molecules combine with another surfactant such as bile
salt (BS) to form MMs, and the hydrophobic core of MM can
encapsulate poorly soluble drugs [90]. Insoluble drugs
dispersed in MMs in molecular state can improve their
bioavailability. Phospholipids can form MMs with multiple
substances, and PC/BS MMs have entered into pharmaceutical
drug market.
BS, detergent-like chemicals produced by liver and stored
in the gallbladder, are able to solubilize PC to a large extent,
and form a clear MMs solution which promotes the adsorption

of fat-soluble substances. Therefore, PC/BS MMs serve as a
carrier that can greatly improve solubility of poorly soluble
drugs. In addition, the results of a previous research showed
that PC can protect against plasma membrane disruption by
BS [91].
Valium® and Konakion® representing the classical MM
system prepared by SPC and glycocholic acid are two MM
preparations which can be available in currently medical
market [6]. Intravenous injection of these MMs exhibits good
stability and compatibity [92].
There are two essentially different types of PC/BS MMs,
which is dependent on the ratio of BS and PC. When BS: lecithin molar ratios are less than approximately 2:1, lamellar
particles similar to a lecithin bilayer arrangement are found
(Fig. 9A). When molar ratios exceed 2:1, a different type of
micelle structure is found. This is a highly isometrical particle
of globular shape (Fig. 9B), probably having a centrosymmetric
arrangement of the molecular constituents [93]. Therefore, a
drawback of PC/BS MMs is that a change in the lecithin/BS
ratio or in the total concentration leads to a change in the MM
size and structure [94].

3.3.2.

Phospholipid micelles

In 1994, it was observed that PE-PEG molecules are able to
form micelles in an aqueous environment [95] (Fig. 10). When
trying to prepare long-circulating liposomes, phoshpholipidePEePEG mixtures could form micelles rather than liposomes if PEePEG content exceeds certain critical limit [40].
This phenomenon is considered as a nuisance until it is
realized that PE-PEG molecules can aggregate to form sterically stabilized micelles (SSMs) which have potential as a
particulate carrier to deliver poorly water-soluble therapeutics, especially anticancer molecules [96]. In PE-PEG micelles,
two fatty acyl chains of the phospholipid residues make hydrophobic interaction of micellar core stronger which leads to
higher stability of micelles, and PEG residue exposed on the
surface can avert the uptake by the MPS which can prolong
the circulating time of micelles [97].
The saturation level of PE has an effect on the circulating
half-life of the micelles. Anatoly et al. demonstrated that
replacing DSPE that is lipid component of PE-PEG with DOPE to
form micelles can reduce the circulating half-life [98].

Fig. 8 e Schematic representation of the structures of conventional emulsion (A) and PEGylated emulsion (B).

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

93

Fig. 9 e Molecular models for the lecithin-rich type of mixed micelles (A) and for the bile salt-rich type (B). The bile salts are
thought to form pairs to avoid contact of the hydroxyl groups (solid circles) with the apolar environment.

Although the SSMs have many advantages, they also
have drawbacks, one of which is the limited solubilization
capability for poorly soluble drugs. In some cases, to
improve drug solubilization, additional micelle-forming
compounds can be added to PEePEG micelles to form MMs.
EPC is added to the micelle composition to form sterically
stabilized mixed micelles (SSMMs) [99]. Insertion of a small
percentage of EPC into a PE-PEG micellar system is able to
increase the volume of the hydrophobic region of micelles.
This would therefore provide a larger space for the hydrophobic drugs to be solubilized. The results showed that the
SSMMs approximately double the paclitaxel encapsulation
efficiency [99].
The addition of EPC into the micelle composition is able to
increase the encapsulation efficiency of paclitaxel, but when
EPC content exceeds certain critical limit, cylindrical micelles
begin to dominate and the solubilization potential for drugs
decreases [100].
Kaminskas et al. studied the ABC phenomenon of PEGylated micelles and liposomes. The results demonstrated that
although PEG micelles could stimulate production of anti-PEG
IgM, which led to accelerated clearance of subsequently
administered PEGylated liposomes. But the second injection
of PEGylated micelles were not substrates for IgM binding and
did not exhibit a similar ABC phenomenon [101].

Fig. 10 e Schematic representation of the structure of PEPEG micelle.

3.4.

Drug-phospholipid complexes

Many synthetic and herbal drugs possess the problem of poor
oral bioavailability, and the reason is their very low water
solubility or poor permeation through the biological membrane. Poorly soluble drugs have suffered from low bioavailability and inefficacy in therapy due to their low dissolution
profile in biological fluid. Without a proper level of drug concentration in the gastrointestinal (GI) fluid, the drugs cannot
be effectively transported by the epithelia of the GI tract,
resulting in low systemic absorption [102]. However, although
most bioactive molecules of plants are biologically polar or
water-soluble, they are difficult to pass through the lipid-rich
biological membrane and be absorbed by human, the reasons
of which include: 1) large molecular weight, 2) low lipid solubility [103].
When studied liposomes, Bombardelli et al. stumbled that
natural flavonoids have a special affinity for phospholipids,
and they can combine to form complexes which exhibit
markedly different biological properties and pharmacological
activities from parent drugs [104]. Thereafter, the drugphospholipid complexes (aptly called as phytosomes) gradually attracted people's attention, and their studies are
increasing. Later researchers found that many types of natural
ingredients and natural extracts can be made from phospholipid complexes. The interaction had been attributed to the
formation of hydrogen bonds and/or hydrophobic interactions between the two molecules [105].
Phytosomes are characterized by amphiphilicity, which
makes them have not only better dissolution in the GI fluid but
also better absorption through the lipophilic membrane system or tissue. Drug-phospholipid complexes can improve the
bioavailability of parent drugs which have either very low lipid
solubility or very poor water solubility. Therefore, both kinds
of drugs can be complexed for improving biopharmaceutical
properties [106]. In addition to improving the drug absorption,
drug-phospholipid complexes also have the following advantages: 1) increasing the stability of drugs, 2) prolonging the
duration of action of drugs [7].
When treated with water, phytosomes form liposome-like
structures (Fig. 11A). However, there are many differences
between phytosomes and liposomes, mainly including: 1) the

94

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

size of liposomes is much bigger than that of phytosomes; 2)
there is the formation of new bonds in phytosomes, whereas
no chemical bond is formed in liposomes; 3) in liposomes,
there are hundreds or thousands of PC molecules surrounding
the water-soluble compounds. Conversely, the molar ratio of
PC and natural ingredients is 1:1 or 2:1 for phytosomes, which
depends on the chemical bond-forming material; 4) the natural active ingredients are dissolved in the medium or wrapped by the membrane in liposomes, while in phytosomes the
active principle is anchored through the chemical bond to the
polar head of phospholipids [107] (Fig. 11B).
In recent years, the reports about phospholipid complexes
of natural active ingredients are gradually increasing. In
abroad, there have been dozens of phytosome products such
as Silybin Phytosome™, Ginkgo Phytosome™, and Ginseng
Phytosome™ [7].

3.5.

[112]. Cochleates can be stored in a cation-containing buffer
solution for over 2 years at 4  C, and at least a year at room
temperature as a lyophilized powder [113]. Cochleates can
be lyophilized to a free flowing powder that can be incorporated in capsules for oral administration or redispersed in
water for injection [114]. 3) Ability to significantly improved
oral absorption of encochleated drug molecules [110]. This
enhanced activity can be attributed to the membrane fusion
capability of cochleates which can be envisioned as membrane fusion intermediates in many naturally occurring
membrane fusion events [110,115]. The high tension of
edges of cochleates makes them interact with the tissue
membrane [110]. 4) High safety. Cochleates are usually
composed of PS and Ca2þ, which are derived from naturally
occurring substances. PS has been used as a nutrient supplement which have a role in supporting the mental functions in aging brains [116].

Cochleates

Cochleates are a lipid-based macromolecular assembles,
having enormous potential in drug delivery. They have
many characteristics including: 1) Ability to deliver a variety
of drugs, such as antifungal agents, polypeptides, proteins,
vaccines, oligonucleotides and genes [108]. Cochleates as a
drug delivery platform are applicable to macromolecules as
well as small molecule drugs that are hydrophobic, amphiphilic, negatively charged, positively charged which have
poor bioavailability [109] (Fig. 12). At first, cochleates are
formed by ionic interaction between negatively charged liposomes and bivalent cations, subsequently, Syed et al.
used cationic drugs themselves as the bridging agents and
successfully prepared the cochleates without adding any
bivalent cations [110] (Fig. 12E). 2) High stability. There is
evidence that drug molecules encochleated in the cochleate
cylinders are present in the inner layers of a solid, stable,
water and oxygen impermeable structure which is capable
of increasing the stability of drugs [111]. The encochleated
drug molecules can remain intact, even though the outermost layer of cochleates can be exposed to the harsh environmental condition or enzyme, which contributes to the
efficaciousness of cochleates for the oral delivery of drugs

4.

Conclusions

In the material world, applications are determined by properties, which are essentially determined by structure. Phospholipids are endogenous substances, so understanding their
nature and physiological functions in vivo is very necessary for
us to comprehend and design its application in drug delivery
platform. For example, from the distribution of phospholipids
in the cell membrane, we can understand the circulation time
of liposome composed of different phospholipids in vivo. The
discussed examples show that phospholipids offer manifold
possibilities to be used as excipients in DDS, which can deliver
both hydrophilic and lipophilic drugs. Thus, suitable carrier
have to be thoughtfully selected for every therapeutic. The applications of phospholipids in drug delivery are certainly not
limited to those described in the present article, and there are
still other applications, such as suspensions, solid lipid nanoparticle and so on. In the future there will be a broad space for
the development of DDS based on phospholipids. Although the
phospholipids have wide applications in DDS, they also face
challenges, for instance, liposomes and intravenous lipid
emulsions have ABC phenomenon. In sum, the applications of

Fig. 11 e Schematic representation of the structure of phytosome (A) and major difference between liposome and
phytosome (B).

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

95

Fig. 12 e Cochleate can encapsulate (A) hydrophobic, (B) amphiphilic, (C) negatively charged, or (D) (E) positively charged
drugs.

phospholipids in DDS are the coexistence of opportunities and
challenges.

references

[1] Pt Cullis, De Kruijff B. Lipid polymorphism and the
functional roles of lipids in biological membranes. Biochim
Biophys Acta (BBA) 1979;559(4):399e420. Reviews on
Biomembranes.
[2] Yang R, Zhang X, Li F, et al. Role of phospholipids and
copolymers in enhancing stability and controlling
degradation of intravenous lipid emulsions. Colloid Surf A
Physicochem Eng Asp 2013;436(0):434e442.
[3] Haynes DH. Phospholipid-coated microcrystals: injectable
formulations of water-insoluble drugs [M]. Google Patents.
1992.

[4] Allen TM, Cullis PR. Liposomal drug delivery systems: from
concept to clinical applications. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
2013;65(1):36e48.
[5] Hippalgaonkar K, Majumdar S, Kansara V. Injectable lipid
emulsionsdadvancements, opportunities and challenges.
AAPS PharmSciTech 2010;11(4):1526e1540.
[6] Rupp C, Steckel H, Müller BW. Solubilization of poorly
water-soluble drugs by mixed micelles based on
hydrogenated phosphatidylcholine. Int J Pharm
2010;395(1):272e280.
[7] Bhattacharya S. Phytosomes: the new technology for
enhancement of bioavailability of botanicals and
nutraceuticals. Int J Health Res 2009;2(3):225e232.
[8] Baer E, Pavanaram SK. N-Methylcephalins I. Synthesis of
distearoyl l-a-glycerylphosphoryl-(n-methyl) ethanolamine.
J Biol Chem 1961;236(5):1269e1272.
[9] Paltauf F, Hermetter A. Phospholipidsdnatural,
semisynthetic, synthetic[M]. Phospholipids. Springer; 1990.
p. 1e12.

96

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

[10] Stafford RE, Dennis EA. Lysophospholipids as
biosurfactants. Colloids Surf 1987;30(1):47e64.
[11] Washington C. Stability of lipid emulsions for drug delivery.
Adv Drug Deliv Rev 1996;20(2):131e145.
[12] Barenholz Y, Thompson T. Sphingomyelins in bilayers and
biological membranes. Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA)
1980;604:129e158. Reviews on Biomembranes.
[13] McIntosh TJ, Simon SA, Needham D, et al. Structure and
cohesive properties of sphingomyelin/cholesterol bilayers.
Biochemistry 1992;31(7):2012e2020.
[14] Barenholz Y, Thompson TE. Sphingomyelin: biophysical
aspects. Chem Phys Lipids 1999;102(1):29e34.
[15] Baer E. From the trioses to the synthesis of natural
phospholipids: a research trail of forty years. J Am Oil Chem
Soc 1965;42(4):257e266.
[16] Szuhaj BF. Lecithins: sources, manufacture and uses. Am
Oil Chem Soc 1989;12.
[17] Lecithin Wendel A. Kirk-othmer encyclopedia of chemical
technology. 1995.
[18] Rossi M. Use of lecithin and lecithin fractions[M]. Bioactive
Egg Compounds. Springer; 2007. p. 229e239.
[19] Hager A, De Paoli T, Ihlo J, et al. Stability study of lecithin
liposomes during storage using ESR. Spectrochim Acta A
1993;49(13):1999e2005.
[20] Terao J, Hirota Y, Kawakatsu M, et al. Structural analysis of
hydroperoxides formed by oxidation of phosphatidylcholine
with singlet oxygen. Lipids 1981;16(6):427e432.
[21] Pace G, Mishra AK, Snow RA, et al. Spray drying process of
compositions containing FENOFIBRATE [M]. EP Patent
1,322,289. 2007.
[22] Eibl H. Synthesis of glycerophospholipids. Chem Phys Lipids
1980;26(4):405e429.
[23] Koynova R, Caffrey M. Phases and phase transitions of the
sphingolipids. Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA) 1995;1255(3):
213e236. Lipids and Lipid Metabolism.
[24] Shapiro D, Segal K. The synthesis of sphingosine. J Am
Chem Soc 1954;76(22):5894e5895.
[25] Shapiro D, Flowers H. Studies on sphingolipids. VII.
Synthesis and configuration of natural sphingomyelins. J
Am Chem Soc 1962;84(6):1047e1050.
[26] Kidd P. Phospholipids: versatile nutraceuticals for
functional foods. Functional ingredients. 2002.
[27] Little A, Levy R, Chuaqui-Kidd P, et al. A double-blind,
placebo controlled trial of high-dose lecithin in Alzheimer's
disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1985;48(8):736e742.
[28] Dowhan W, Bogdanov M. Functional roles of lipids in
membranes. New Compr Biochem 2002;36:1e35.
[29] Pepeu G, Pepeu I, Amaducci L. A review of
phosphatidylserine pharmacological and clinical effects. Is
phosphatidylserine a drug for the ageing brain? Pharmacol
Res 1996;33(2):73e80.
[30] Fadok VA, de Cathelineau A, Daleke DL, et al. Loss of
phospholipid asymmetry and surface exposure of
phosphatidylserine is required for phagocytosis of
apoptotic cells by macrophages and fibroblasts. J Biol Chem
2001;276(2):1071e1077.
[31] Lentz BR. Exposure of platelet membrane
phosphatidylserine regulates blood coagulation. Prog Lipid
Res 2003;42(5):423e438.
[32] Bansal VS, Majerus PW. Phosphatidylinositol-derived
precursors and signals. Annu Rev Cell Biol 1990;6(1):41e67.
[33] Hoch FL. Cardiolipins and biomembrane function. Biochim
Biophys Acta (BBA) 1992;1113(1):71e133. Reviews on
Biomembranes.
[34] Chiu S, Vasudevan S, Jakobsson E, et al. Structure of
sphingomyelin bilayers: a simulation study. Biophys J
2003;85(6):3624e3635.

[35] Cullis PR, Hope MJ, Tilcock CPS. Lipid polymorphism and
the roles of lipids in membranes. Chem Phys Lipids
1986;40(2e4):127e144.
[36] Tilcock CP. Lipid polymorphism. Chem Phys Lipids
1986;40(2):109e125.
[37] Hope MJ, Cullis PR. Effects of divalent cations and pH on
phosphatidylserine model membranes: a 31P NMR study.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1980;92(3):846e852.
[38] Farren SB, Hope MJ, Cullis PR. Polymorphic phase
preferences of phosphatidic acid: a 31P and 2H NMR study.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1983;111(2):675e682.
[39] Hope MJ, Walker DC, Cullis PR. Ca2þ and pH induced fusion
of small unilamellar vesicles consisting of
phosphatidylethanolamine and negatively charged
phospholipids: a freeze fracture study. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 1983;110(1):15e22.
[40] Edwards K, Johnsson M, Karlsson G, et al. Effect of
polyethyleneglycol-phospholipids on aggregate structure in
preparations of small unilamellar liposomes. Biophys J
1997;73(1):258e266.
[41] Kenworthy AK, Simon SA, McIntosh TJ. Structure and phase
behavior of lipid suspensions containing phospholipids
with covalently attached poly (ethylene glycol). Biophys J
1995;68(5):1903e1920.
[42] Johnsson M, Edwards K. Liposomes, disks, and spherical
micelles: aggregate structure in mixtures of gel phase
phosphatidylcholines and poly (ethylene glycol)phospholipids. Biophys J 2003;85(6):3839e3847.
[43] Holland JW, Cullis PR, Madden TD. Poly (ethylene
glycol)-lipid conjugates promote bilayer formation in
mixtures of non-bilayer-forming lipids. Biochemistry
1996;35(8):2610e2617.
[44] Johnsson M, Edwards K. Phase behavior and aggregate
structure in mixtures of dioleoylphosphatidylethanolamine
and poly (ethylene glycol)-lipids. Biophys J
2001;80(1):313e323.
[45] Verkleij A, De Kruyff B, Ververgaert P, et al. The influence of
pH, Ca2þ and protein on the thermotropic behaviour of the
negatively charged phospholipid, phosphatidylglycerol.
Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA) 1974;339(3):432e437.
Biomembranes.
[46] Ververgaert JT, De Kruyff B, Verkleij A, et al. Calorimetric
and freeze-etch study of the influence of Mg2þ on the
thermotropic behaviour of phosphatidylglycerol. Chem
Phys Lipids 1975;14(1):97e101.
[47] Papahadjopoulos D, Poste G, Schaeffer B, et al. Membrane
fusion and molecular segregation in phospholipid vesicles.
Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA) 1974;352(1):10e28.
Biomembranes.
[48] Papahadjopoulos D, Vail W, Jacobson K, et al. Cochleate
lipid cylinders: formation by fusion of unilamellar lipid
vesicles. Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA) 1975;394(3):483e491.
Biomembranes.
[49] Düzgüne N, Nir S, Wilschut J, et al. Calcium- and
magnesium-induced fusion of mixed phosphatidylserine/
phosphatidylcholine vesicles: effect of ion binding. J Membr
Biol 1981;59(2):115e125.
[50] Vail WJ, Stollery JG. Phase changes of cardiolipin vesicles
mediated by divalent cations. Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA)
1979;551(1):74e84. Biomembranes.
[51] Graham I, Gagne J, Silvius JR. Kinetics and thermodynamics
of calcium-induced lateral phase separations in
phosphatidic acid-containing bilayers. Biochemistry
1985;24(25):7123e7131.
[52] Farren SB, Cullis PR. Polymorphism of
phosphatidylglycerol-phosphatidylethanolamine model
membrane systems: a 31P NMR study. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1980;97(1):182e191.

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

[53] Nayar R, Schmid S, Hope M, et al. Structural preferences of
phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidylinositolphosphatidylethanolamine model membranes influence of
Ca2þand Mg2þ. Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA)
1982;688(1):169e176. Biomembranes.
[54] Taylor KM, Morris RM. Thermal analysis of phase transition
behaviour in liposomes. Thermochim Acta
1995;248:289e301.
[55] Samad A, Sultana Y, Aqil M. Liposomal drug delivery
systems: an update review. Curr Drug Deliv
2007;4(4):297e305.
[56] Ikeda A, Kawai Y, Kikuchi J, et al. Formation and regulation
of fullerene-incorporation in liposomes under the phase
transition temperature. Org Biomol Chem
2011;9(8):2622e2627.
[57] Contreras F-X, Sot J, Ruiz-Argüello M-B, et al. Cholesterol
modulation of sphingomyelinase activity at physiological
temperatures. Chem Phys Lipids 2004;130(2):127e134.
[58] Bangham A, Horne R. Negative staining of phospholipids
and their structural modification by surface-active agents
as observed in the electron microscope. J Mol Biol 1964;8(5).
660eIN10.
[59] Bangham A, Standish M, Watkins J. Diffusion of univalent
ions across the lamellae of swollen phospholipids. J Mol Biol
1965;13(1). 238eIN27.
[60] Gregoriadis G, Leathwood P, Ryman BE. Enzyme entrapment
in liposomes. FEBS Lett 1971;14(2):95e99.
[61] Hann IM, Prentice HG. Lipid-based amphotericin B: a review
of the last 10 years of use. Int J Antimicrob Agents
2001;17(3):161e169.
[62] Fan Y, Zhang Q. Development of liposomal formulations:
from concept to clinical investigations. Asian J Pharm Sci
2013;8(2):81e87.
[63] Nara E, Miyashita K, Ota T. Oxidative stability of liposomes
prepared from soybean PC, chicken egg PC, and salmon egg
PC. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 1997;61(10):1736.
[64] Wang Jibo, Sun Yanzeng. The relationship between drug
carrying ability of liposomes and phosphatidylcholines.
Fine Chemicals 2008;25:256e259.
[65] Simoes S, Slepushkin V, Düzgünes N, et al. On the
mechanisms of internalization and intracellular delivery
mediated by pH-sensitive liposomes. Biochim Biophys Acta
(BBA) 2001;1515(1):23e37. Biomembranes.
[66] Schroit AJ, Madsen J, Nayar R. Liposome-cell interactions:
in vitro discrimination of uptake mechanism and in vivo
targeting strategies to mononuclear phagocytes. Chem Phys
Lipids 1986;40(2):373e393.
[67] Yatvin MB, Weinstein JN, Dennis WH, et al. Design of
liposomes for enhanced local release of drugs by
hyperthermia. Science 1978;202(4374):1290e1293.
[68] Gaber MH, Hong K, Huang SK, et al. Thermosensitive
sterically stabilized liposomes: formulation and in vitro
studies on mechanism of doxorubicin release by bovine
serum and human plasma. Pharm Res
1995;12(10):1407e1416.
[69] Anyarambhatla GR, Needham D. Enhancement of the
phase transition permeability of DPPC liposomes by
incorporation of MPPC: a new temperature-sensitive
liposome for use with mild hyperthermia. J Liposome Res
1999;9(4):491e506.
[70] Oude Blenke E, Mastrobattista E, Schiffelers RM. Strategies
for triggered drug release from tumor targeted liposomes.
Expert Opin Drug Deliv 2013;10(10):1399e1410.
[71] Kono K. Thermosensitive polymer-modified liposomes. Adv
Drug Deliv Rev 2001;53(3):307e319.
[72] Allen T, Williamson P, Schlegel RA. Phosphatidylserine as a
determinant of reticuloendothelial recognition of liposome

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]
[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]
[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

97

models of the erythrocyte surface. Proc Natl Acad Sci
1988;85(21):8067e8071.
Zachowski A. Phospholipids in animal eukaryotic
membranes: transverse asymmetry and movement.
Biochem J London 1993;294:1.
McEvoY L, Williamson P, Schlegel RA. Membrane
phospholipid asymmetry as a determinant of erythrocyte
recognition by macrophages. Proc Natl Acad Sci
1986;83(10):3311e3315.
Allen TM, Hansen C, Rutledge J. Liposomes with prolonged
circulation times: factors affecting uptake by
reticuloendothelial and other tissues. Biochim Biophys Acta
(BBA) 1989;981(1):27e35. Biomembranes.
Allen TM. Stealth liposomes: five years on. J Liposome Res
1992;2(3):289e305.
Allen T, Chonn A. Large unilamellar liposomes with low
uptake into the reticuloendothelial system. FEBS Lett
1987;223(1):42e46.
Webb M, Harasym T, Masin D, et al. Sphingomyelincholesterol liposomes significantly enhance the
pharmacokinetic and therapeutic properties of vincristine
in murine and human tumour models. B J Cancer
1995;72(4):896.
Allen TM. A study of phospholipid interactions between
high-density lipoproteins and small unilamellar vesicles.
Biochim Biophysica Acta (BBA) 1981;640(2):385e397.
Biomembranes.
Papahadjopoulos D, Allen T, Gabizon A, et al. Sterically
stabilized liposomes: improvements in pharmacokinetics
and antitumor therapeutic efficacy. Proc Natl Acad Sci
1991;88(24):11460e11464.
Ishida T, Harada M, Wang XY, et al. Accelerated blood
clearance of PEGylated liposomes following preceding
liposome injection: effects of lipid dose and PEG surfacedensity and chain length of the first-dose liposomes. J
Control Release 2005;105(3):305e317.
Laverman P, Carstens MG, Boerman OC, et al. Factors
affecting the accelerated blood clearance of polyethylene
glycol-liposomes upon repeated injection. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 2001;298(2):607e612.
Xu H, Ye F, Hu M, et al. Influence of phospholipid types and
animal models on the accelerated blood clearance
phenomenon of PEGylated liposomes upon repeated
injection. Drug Deliv 2014:1e10.
Wretlind A. Development of fat emulsions. JPEN J Parenter
Enteral Nutr 1980;5(3):230e235.
Hansrani P, Davis S, Groves M. The preparation and
properties of sterile intravenous emulsions. PDA J Pharm
Sci Tech JulyeAugust 1983;37(4):145e150. PDA J Pharm Sci
Technol 1983;37: 145e150.
Herman C, Groves M. Hydrolysis kinetics of phospholipids
in thermally stressed intravenous lipid emulsion
formulations. J Pharm Pharmacol 1992;44(7):539e542.
Lenzo NP, Martins I, Mortimer B-C, et al. Effects of
phospholipid composition on the metabolism of
triacylglycerol, cholesteryl ester and phosphatidylcholine
from lipid emulsions injected intravenously in rats.
Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA) 1988;960(1):111e118. Lipids and
Lipid Metabolism.
Redgrave TG, Rakic V, Mortimer B-C, et al. Effects of
sphingomyelin and phosphatidylcholine acyl chains on the
clearance of triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins from plasma.
Studies with lipid emulsions in rats. Biochim Biophys Acta
(BBA) 1992;1126(1):65e72. Lipids and Lipid Metabolism.
Wang C, Cheng X, Sui Y, et al. A noticeable phenomenon:
thiol terminal PEG enhances the immunogenicity of
PEGylated emulsions injected intravenously or

98

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

a s i a n j o u r n a l o f p h a r m a c e u t i c a l s c i e n c e s 1 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 8 1 e9 8

subcutaneously into rats. Eur J Pharm Biopharm
2013;85(3):744e751.
Hammad M, Müller B. Increasing drug solubility by means
of bile saltephosphatidylcholine-based mixed micelles. Eur
J Pharm Biopharm 1998;46(3):361e367.
Narain P, DeMaria E, Heuman D. Lecithin protects against
plasma membrane disruption by bile salts. J Surg Res
1998;78(2):131e136.
€ rtl A, et al. Microemulsion and
Mrestani Y, Behbood L, Ha
mixed micelle for oral administration as new drug
formulations for highly hydrophilic drugs. Eur J Pharm
Biopharm 2010;74(2):219e222.
Müller K. Structural dimorphism of bile salt/lecithin mixed
micelles. A possible regulatory mechanism for cholesterol
solubility in bile? X-ray structural analysis. Biochemistry
1981;20(2):404e414.
Shankland W. The equilibrium and structure of lecithincholate mixed micelles. Chem Phys Lipids
1970;4(2):109e130.
Torchilin VP, Omelyanenko VG, Papisov MI, et al. Poly
(ethylene glycol) on the liposome surface: on the
mechanism of polymer-coated liposome longevity. Biochim
Biophys Acta (BBA) 1994;1195(1):11e20. Biomembranes.
Trubetskoy V, Torchilin V. Polyethyleneglycol based
micelles as carriers of therapeutic and diagnostic agents.
STP Pharma Sci 1996;6(1):79e86.
Trubetskoy VS, Torchilin VP. Use of polyoxyethylene-lipid
conjugates as long-circulating carriers for delivery of
therapeutic and diagnostic agents. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
1995;16(2):311e320.
Lukyanov AN, Torchilin VP. Micelles from lipid derivatives
of water-soluble polymers as delivery systems for poorly
soluble drugs. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2004;56(9):1273e1289.
€
Krishnadas A, Rubinstein I, Onyüksel
H. Sterically stabilized
phospholipid mixed micelles: in vitro evaluation as a novel
carrier for water-insoluble drugs. Pharm Res
2003;20(2):297e302.
Ashok B, Arleth L, Hjelm RP, et al. In vitro characterization
of PEGylated phospholipid micelles for improved drug
solubilization: effects of PEG chain length and PC
incorporation. J Pharm Sci 2004;93(10):2476e2487.
Kaminskas LM, Mcleod VM, Porter H, et al. Differences in
colloidal structure of PEGylated nanomaterials dictate the
likelihood of accelerated blood clearance. J Pharm Sci
2011;100(11):5069e5077.

[102] Singh D, Rawat M, Semalty A, et al.
Chrysophanolephospholipid complex. J Therm Anal
Calorim 2013;111(3):2069e2077.
[103] Shivanand P, Kinjal P. Phytosomes: technical revolution in
phytomedicine. Int J PharmTech Res 2010;2(1):627e631.
[104] Bombardelli E. Phytosome: new cosmetic delivery system.
Boll Chim Farm 1991;130(11):431.
[105] Pathan RA, Bhandari U. Preparation & characterization of
embelinephospholipid complex as effective drug delivery
tool. J Incl Phenom Macrocycl Chem 2011;69(1e2):139e147.
[106] Semalty A, Semalty M, Rawat BS, et al. Pharmacosomes: the
lipid-based new drug delivery system. 2009.
[107] Shelke SS. Phytosomes-a new herbal drug delivery system.
Int J Res Pharm Biomed Sci 2012;3(4):1710e1715.
[108] Rao R, Squillante III E, Kim KH. Lipid-based cochleates: a
promising formulation platform for oral and parenteral
delivery of therapeutic agents. Crit Rev Ther Drug Carrier
Syst 2007;24(1).
[109] Zarif L, Graybill JR, Perlin D, et al. Cochleates: new lipidbased drug delivery system. J Liposome Res
2000;10(4):523e538.
[110] Syed UM, Woo AF, Plakogiannis F, et al. Cochleates bridged
by drug molecules. Int J Pharm 2008;363(1):118e125.
[111] Marone P, Elsmore S, Sandulow J, et al. Structural
determinants of divalent cation-induced
phosphatidylserine cochleate crystallization. Microsc
Microanal 2005;11(S02):1244e1245.
[112] Gould-Fogerite S, Mannino RJ. Mucosal and systemic
immunization using cochleate and liposome vaccines. J
Liposome Res 1996;6(2):357e379.
[113] Delmarre D, Gould-Fogerite S, Mannino R. Formulation of
hydrophobic drugs into cochleate delivery vehicles: a
simplified protocol & bioral TM formulation kit. Drug Deliv
Technol 2004;4(1):1e10.
[114] Rawat M, Singh D, Saraf S, et al. Lipid carriers: a versatile
delivery vehicle for proteins and peptides. Proteins 2008;3:2.
[115] Sanchezmigallon MP, Aranda FJ, Gomezfernandez JC. Role
of phosphatidylserine and diacylglycerol in the fusion of
chromaffin granules with target membranes. Arch Biochem
Biophys 1994;314(1):205e216.
[116] Nerozzi D, Aceti F, Melia E, et al. Phosphatidylserine and
memory disorders in the aged. La Clinica Terapeutica
1987;120(5):399e404.

