Keywords
Magnesium aluminium silicate
Propranolol hydrochloride
Isothermal titration calorimetry
Complexation

ABSTRACT

Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) along with attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR), scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM/EDX) and
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) were employed to investigate the process of adsorption of
propranolol hydrochloride (PPN) onto magnesium aluminium silicate (MAS) and to characterise the MAS-PPN
particles formed upon complexation. The composition of MAS was confirmed by infrared (IR) spectroscopy and a
calcimeter. The calorimetric results confirmed the binding between PPN and MAS at various pHs and temperatures. The overall change in enthalpy was found to be exothermic with a comparatively small entropic
contribution to the total change in Gibbs free energy. These findings suggest that the binding process was
enthalpically driven and entropically unfavourable (lower affinity) suggesting hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions dominating the interaction. The variation of pH and temperature did not have a great impact
on the thermodynamics of the binding process, as observed from the similarity in enthalpy (ΔH), entropy (ΔS) or
Gibbs free energy (ΔG). A slight reduction in the binding affinity (Ka) with varing pH and temperature was
however observed. SEM/EDX studies showed the occurrence of changes in the microstructural properties of MAS
following complexation which may explain the potential of MAS-PPN complexes for controlled drug release
promoting pharmaceutical innovation.

Introduction
Sustained-release drug formulation is of high importance as it
achieves optimal therapeutic efficacy in chronic conditions where
treatment must be administered at constant levels over a period of time,
and provides a reduced frequency of side effects (Aulton, 2007). In
recent years, excipients such as clay minerals have often been used as
carriers of active ingredients to retard or modulate drug release
(Trikeriotis and Ghanotakis, 2007; Park et al., 2008; Joshi et al., 2009;
Meng et al., 2009; Pongjanyakul et al., 2009; Rojtanatanya and
Pongjanyakul, 2010). Their physicochemical properties make them
suitable to be used in the formulation of pharmaceutical dosage forms,
as they can adsorb the active ingredient onto their structure and form
complex dispersions and particles (Carretero and Pozo, 2009;
Pongjanyakul et al., 2009; Rojtanatanya and Pongjanyakul, 2010;

Main
Kanjanakawinkul et al., 2013; Rongthong et al., 2013). These have been
shown to modify the release of drugs upon administration, which would
be desirable for drugs having a short half

end
